<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap01"/>PREFACE</h2>
<p>
An apology is perhaps needed for the neglect of contrast which is shown by
presenting two consecutive stories of hangmen in such a small collection as the
following. But in the neighbourhood of county-towns tales of executions used to
form a large proportion of the local traditions; and though never personally
acquainted with any chief operator at such scenes, the writer of these pages
had as a boy the privilege of being on speaking terms with a man who applied
for the office, and who sank into an incurable melancholy because he failed to
get it, some slight mitigation of his grief being to dwell upon striking
episodes in the lives of those happier ones who had held it with success and
renown. His tale of disappointment used to cause some wonder why his ambition
should have taken such an unfortunate form, but its nobleness was never
questioned. In those days, too, there was still living an old woman who, for
the cure of some eating disease, had been taken in her youth to have her
‘blood turned’ by a convict’s corpse, in the manner described
in ‘The Withered Arm.’
</p>
<p>
Since writing this story some years ago I have been reminded by an aged friend
who knew ‘Rhoda Brook’ that, in relating her dream, my
forgetfulness has weakened the facts out of which the tale grew. In reality it
was while lying down on a hot afternoon that the incubus oppressed her and she
flung it off, with the results upon the body of the original as described. To
my mind the occurrence of such a vision in the daytime is more impressive than
if it had happened in a midnight dream. Readers are therefore asked to correct
the misrelation, which affords an instance of how our imperfect memories
insensibly formalize the fresh originality of living fact—from whose
shape they slowly depart, as machine-made castings depart by degrees from the
sharp hand-work of the mould.
</p>
<p>
Among the many devices for concealing smuggled goods in caves and pits of the
earth, that of planting an apple-tree in a tray or box which was placed over
the mouth of the pit is, I believe, unique, and it is detailed in one of the
tales precisely as described by an old carrier of ‘tubs’—a
man who was afterwards in my father’s employ for over thirty years. I
never gathered from his reminiscences what means were adopted for lifting the
tree, which, with its roots, earth, and receptacle, must have been of
considerable weight. There is no doubt, however, that the thing was done
through many years. My informant often spoke, too, of the horribly suffocating
sensation produced by the pair of spirit-tubs slung upon the chest and back,
after stumbling with the burden of them for several miles inland over a rough
country and in darkness. He said that though years of his youth and young
manhood were spent in this irregular business, his profits from the same, taken
all together, did not average the wages he might have earned in a steady
employment, whilst the fatigues and risks were excessive.
</p>
<p>
I may add that the first story in the series turns upon a physical possibility
that may attach to women of imaginative temperament, and that is well supported
by the experiences of medical men and other observers of such manifestations.
</p>
<p class="right">
T. H.
</p>
<p class="letter">
<i>April</i> 1896.
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap02"/>AN IMAGINATIVE WOMAN</h2>
<p>
When William Marchmill had finished his inquiries for lodgings at a well-known
watering-place in Upper Wessex, he returned to the hotel to find his wife. She,
with the children, had rambled along the shore, and Marchmill followed in the
direction indicated by the military-looking hall-porter
</p>
<p>
‘By Jove, how far you’ve gone! I am quite out of breath,’
Marchmill said, rather impatiently, when he came up with his wife, who was
reading as she walked, the three children being considerably further ahead with
the nurse.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Marchmill started out of the reverie into which the book had thrown her.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘you’ve been such a long time. I was
tired of staying in that dreary hotel. But I am sorry if you have wanted me,
Will?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I have had trouble to suit myself. When you see the airy and
comfortable rooms heard of, you find they are stuffy and uncomfortable. Will
you come and see if what I’ve fixed on will do? There is not much room, I
am afraid; hut I can light on nothing better. The town is rather full.’
</p>
<p>
The pair left the children and nurse to continue their ramble, and went back
together.
</p>
<p>
In age well-balanced, in personal appearance fairly matched, and in domestic
requirements conformable, in temper this couple differed, though even here they
did not often clash, he being equable, if not lymphatic, and she decidedly
nervous and sanguine. It was to their tastes and fancies, those smallest,
greatest particulars, that no common denominator could be applied. Marchmill
considered his wife’s likes and inclinations somewhat silly; she
considered his sordid and material. The husband’s business was that of a
gunmaker in a thriving city northwards, and his soul was in that business
always; the lady was best characterized by that superannuated phrase of
elegance ‘a votary of the muse.’ An impressionable, palpitating
creature was Ella, shrinking humanely from detailed knowledge of her
husband’s trade whenever she reflected that everything he manufactured
had for its purpose the destruction of life. She could only recover her
equanimity by assuring herself that some, at least, of his weapons were sooner
or later used for the extermination of horrid vermin and animals almost as
cruel to their inferiors in species as human beings were to theirs.
</p>
<p>
She had never antecedently regarded this occupation of his as any objection to
having him for a husband. Indeed, the necessity of getting life-leased at all
cost, a cardinal virtue which all good mothers teach, kept her from thinking of
it at all till she had closed with William, had passed the honeymoon, and
reached the reflecting stage. Then, like a person who has stumbled upon some
object in the dark, she wondered what she had got; mentally walked round it,
estimated it; whether it were rare or common; contained gold, silver, or lead;
were a clog or a pedestal, everything to her or nothing.
</p>
<p>
She came to some vague conclusions, and since then had kept her heart alive by
pitying her proprietor’s obtuseness and want of refinement, pitying
herself, and letting off her delicate and ethereal emotions in imaginative
occupations, day-dreams, and night-sighs, which perhaps would not much have
disturbed William if he had known of them.
</p>
<p>
Her figure was small, elegant, and slight in build, tripping, or rather
bounding, in movement. She was dark-eyed, and had that marvellously bright and
liquid sparkle in each pupil which characterizes persons of Ella’s cast
of soul, and is too often a cause of heartache to the possessor’s male
friends, ultimately sometimes to herself. Her husband was a tall, long-featured
man, with a brown beard; he had a pondering regard; and was, it must be added,
usually kind and tolerant to her. He spoke in squarely shaped sentences, and
was supremely satisfied with a condition of sublunary things which made weapons
a necessity.
</p>
<p>
Husband and wife walked till they had reached the house they were in search of,
which stood in a terrace facing the sea, and was fronted by a small garden of
wind-proof and salt-proof evergreens, stone steps leading up to the porch. It
had its number in the row, but, being rather larger than the rest, was in
addition sedulously distinguished as Coburg House by its landlady, though
everybody else called it ‘Thirteen, New Parade.’ The spot was
bright and lively now; but in winter it became necessary to place sandbags
against the door, and to stuff up the keyhole against the wind and rain, which
had worn the paint so thin that the priming and knotting showed through.
</p>
<p>
The householder, who had been watching for the gentleman’s return, met
them in the passage, and showed the rooms. She informed them that she was a
professional man’s widow, left in needy circumstances by the rather
sudden death of her husband, and she spoke anxiously of the conveniences of the
establishment.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Marchmill said that she liked the situation and the house; but, it being
small, there would not be accommodation enough, unless she could have all the
rooms.
</p>
<p>
The landlady mused with an air of disappointment. She wanted the visitors to be
her tenants very badly, she said, with obvious honesty. But unfortunately two
of the rooms were occupied permanently by a bachelor gentleman. He did not pay
season prices, it was true; but as he kept on his apartments all the year
round, and was an extremely nice and interesting young man, who gave no
trouble, she did not like to turn him out for a month’s
‘let,’ even at a high figure. ‘Perhaps, however,’ she
added, ‘he might offer to go for a time.’
</p>
<p>
They would not hear of this, and went back to the hotel, intending to proceed
to the agent’s to inquire further. Hardly had they sat down to tea when
the landlady called. Her gentleman, she said, had been so obliging as to offer
to give up his rooms for three or four weeks rather than drive the new-comers
away.
</p>
<p>
‘It is very kind, but we won’t inconvenience him in that
way,’ said the Marchmills.
</p>
<p>
‘O, it won’t inconvenience him, I assure you!’ said the
landlady eloquently. ‘You see, he’s a different sort of young man
from most—dreamy, solitary, rather melancholy—and he cares more to
be here when the south-westerly gales are beating against the door, and the sea
washes over the Parade, and there’s not a soul in the place, than he does
now in the season. He’d just as soon be where, in fact, he’s going
temporarily, to a little cottage on the Island opposite, for a change.’
She hoped therefore that they would come.
</p>
<p>
The Marchmill family accordingly took possession of the house next day, and it
seemed to suit them very well. After luncheon Mr. Marchmill strolled out
towards the pier, and Mrs. Marchmill, having despatched the children to their
outdoor amusements on the sands, settled herself in more completely, examining
this and that article, and testing the reflecting powers of the mirror in the
wardrobe door.
</p>
<p>
In the small back sitting-room, which had been the young bachelor’s, she
found furniture of a more personal nature than in the rest. Shabby books, of
correct rather than rare editions, were piled up in a queerly reserved manner
in corners, as if the previous occupant had not conceived the possibility that
any incoming person of the season’s bringing could care to look inside
them. The landlady hovered on the threshold to rectify anything that Mrs.
Marchmill might not find to her satisfaction.
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll make this my own little room,’ said the latter,
‘because the books are here. By the way, the person who has left seems to
have a good many. He won’t mind my reading some of them, Mrs. Hooper, I
hope?’
</p>
<p>
‘O dear no, ma’am. Yes, he has a good many. You see, he is in the
literary line himself somewhat. He is a poet—yes, really a poet—and
he has a little income of his own, which is enough to write verses on, but not
enough for cutting a figure, even if he cared to.’
</p>
<p>
‘A poet! O, I did not know that.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Marchmill opened one of the books, and saw the owner’s name written
on the title-page. ‘Dear me!’ she continued; ‘I know his name
very well—Robert Trewe—of course I do; and his writings! And it is
<i>his</i> rooms we have taken, and <i>him</i> we have turned out of his
home?’
</p>
<p>
Ella Marchmill, sitting down alone a few minutes later, thought with interested
surprise of Robert Trewe. Her own latter history will best explain that
interest. Herself the only daughter of a struggling man of letters, she had
during the last year or two taken to writing poems, in an endeavour to find a
congenial channel in which to let flow her painfully embayed emotions, whose
former limpidity and sparkle seemed departing in the stagnation caused by the
routine of a practical household and the gloom of bearing children to a
commonplace father. These poems, subscribed with a masculine pseudonym, had
appeared in various obscure magazines, and in two cases in rather prominent
ones. In the second of the latter the page which bore her effusion at the
bottom, in smallish print, bore at the top, in large print, a few verses on the
same subject by this very man, Robert Trewe. Both of them had, in fact, been
struck by a tragic incident reported in the daily papers, and had used it
simultaneously as an inspiration, the editor remarking in a note upon the
coincidence, and that the excellence of both poems prompted him to give them
together.
</p>
<p>
After that event Ella, otherwise ‘John Ivy,’ had watched with much
attention the appearance anywhere in print of verse bearing the signature of
Robert Trewe, who, with a man’s unsusceptibility on the question of sex,
had never once thought of passing himself off as a woman. To be sure, Mrs.
Marchmill had satisfied herself with a sort of reason for doing the contrary in
her case; that nobody might believe in her inspiration if they found that the
sentiments came from a pushing tradesman’s wife, from the mother of three
children by a matter-of-fact small-arms manufacturer.
</p>
<p>
Trewe’s verse contrasted with that of the rank and file of recent minor
poets in being impassioned rather than ingenious, luxuriant rather than
finished. Neither <i>symboliste</i> nor <i>décadent</i>, he was a pessimist in
so far as that character applies to a man who looks at the worst contingencies
as well as the best in the human condition. Being little attracted by
excellences of form and rhythm apart from content, he sometimes, when feeling
outran his artistic speed, perpetrated sonnets in the loosely rhymed
Elizabethan fashion, which every right-minded reviewer said he ought not to
have done.
</p>
<p>
With sad and hopeless envy, Ella Marchmill had often and often scanned the
rival poet’s work, so much stronger as it always was than her own feeble
lines. She had imitated him, and her inability to touch his level would send
her into fits of despondency. Months passed away thus, till she observed from
the publishers’ list that Trewe had collected his fugitive pieces into a
volume, which was duly issued, and was much or little praised according to
chance, and had a sale quite sufficient to pay for the printing.
</p>
<p>
This step onward had suggested to John Ivy the idea of collecting her pieces
also, or at any rate of making up a book of her rhymes by adding many in
manuscript to the few that had seen the light, for she had been able to get no
great number into print. A ruinous charge was made for costs of publication; a
few reviews noticed her poor little volume; but nobody talked of it, nobody
bought it, and it fell dead in a fortnight—if it had ever been alive.
</p>
<p>
The author’s thoughts were diverted to another groove just then by the
discovery that she was going to have a third child, and the collapse of her
poetical venture had perhaps less effect upon her mind than it might have done
if she had been domestically unoccupied. Her husband had paid the
publisher’s bill with the doctor’s, and there it all had ended for
the time. But, though less than a poet of her century, Ella was more than a
mere multiplier of her kind, and latterly she had begun to feel the old
afflatus once more. And now by an odd conjunction she found herself in the
rooms of Robert Trewe.
</p>
<p>
She thoughtfully rose from her chair and searched the apartment with the
interest of a fellow-tradesman. Yes, the volume of his own verse was among the
rest. Though quite familiar with its contents, she read it here as if it spoke
aloud to her, then called up Mrs. Hooper, the landlady, for some trivial
service, and inquired again about the young man.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I’m sure you’d be interested in him, ma’am, if
you could see him, only he’s so shy that I don’t suppose you
will.’ Mrs. Hooper seemed nothing loth to minister to her tenant’s
curiosity about her predecessor. ‘Lived here long? Yes, nearly two years.
He keeps on his rooms even when he’s not here: the soft air of this place
suits his chest, and he likes to be able to come back at any time. He is mostly
writing or reading, and doesn’t see many people, though, for the matter
of that, he is such a good, kind young fellow that folks would only be too glad
to be friendly with him if they knew him. You don’t meet kind-hearted
people every day.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, he’s kind-hearted . . . and good.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; he’ll oblige me in anything if I ask him. “Mr.
Trewe,” I say to him sometimes, “you are rather out of
spirits.” “Well, I am, Mrs. Hooper,” he’ll say,
“though I don’t know how you should find it out.” “Why
not take a little change?” I ask. Then in a day or two he’ll say
that he will take a trip to Paris, or Norway, or somewhere; and I assure you he
comes back all the better for it.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, indeed! His is a sensitive nature, no doubt.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes. Still he’s odd in some things. Once when he had finished a
poem of his composition late at night he walked up and down the room rehearsing
it; and the floors being so thin—jerry-built houses, you know, though I
say it myself—he kept me awake up above him till I wished him further . .
. But we get on very well.’
</p>
<p>
This was but the beginning of a series of conversations about the rising poet
as the days went on. On one of these occasions Mrs. Hooper drew Ella’s
attention to what she had not noticed before: minute scribblings in pencil on
the wall-paper behind the curtains at the head of the bed.
</p>
<p>
‘O! let me look,’ said Mrs. Marchmill, unable to conceal a rush of
tender curiosity as she bent her pretty face close to the wall.
</p>
<p>
‘These,’ said Mrs. Hooper, with the manner of a woman who knew
things, ‘are the very beginnings and first thoughts of his verses. He has
tried to rub most of them out, but you can read them still. My belief is that
he wakes up in the night, you know, with some rhyme in his head, and jots it
down there on the wall lest he should forget it by the morning. Some of these
very lines you see here I have seen afterwards in print in the magazines. Some
are newer; indeed, I have not seen that one before. It must have been done only
a few days ago.’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes! . . . ’
</p>
<p>
Ella Marchmill flushed without knowing why, and suddenly wished her companion
would go away, now that the information was imparted. An indescribable
consciousness of personal interest rather than literary made her anxious to
read the inscription alone; and she accordingly waited till she could do so,
with a sense that a great store of emotion would be enjoyed in the act.
</p>
<p>
Perhaps because the sea was choppy outside the Island, Ella’s husband
found it much pleasanter to go sailing and steaming about without his wife, who
was a bad sailor, than with her. He did not disdain to go thus alone on board
the steamboats of the cheap-trippers, where there was dancing by moonlight, and
where the couples would come suddenly down with a lurch into each other’s
arms; for, as he blandly told her, the company was too mixed for him to take
her amid such scenes. Thus, while this thriving manufacturer got a great deal
of change and sea-air out of his sojourn here, the life, external at least, of
Ella was monotonous enough, and mainly consisted in passing a certain number of
hours each day in bathing and walking up and down a stretch of shore. But the
poetic impulse having again waxed strong, she was possessed by an inner flame
which left her hardly conscious of what was proceeding around her.
</p>
<p>
She had read till she knew by heart Trewe’s last little volume of verses,
and spent a great deal of time in vainly attempting to rival some of them,
till, in her failure, she burst into tears. The personal element in the
magnetic attraction exercised by this circumambient, unapproachable master of
hers was so much stronger than the intellectual and abstract that she could not
understand it. To be sure, she was surrounded noon and night by his customary
environment, which literally whispered of him to her at every moment; but he
was a man she had never seen, and that all that moved her was the instinct to
specialize a waiting emotion on the first fit thing that came to hand did not,
of course, suggest itself to Ella.
</p>
<p>
In the natural way of passion under the too practical conditions which
civilization has devised for its fruition, her husband’s love for her had
not survived, except in the form of fitful friendship, any more than, or even
so much as, her own for him; and, being a woman of very living ardours, that
required sustenance of some sort, they were beginning to feed on this chancing
material, which was, indeed, of a quality far better than chance usually
offers.
</p>
<p>
One day the children had been playing hide-and-seek in a closet, whence, in
their excitement, they pulled out some clothing. Mrs. Hooper explained that it
belonged to Mr. Trewe, and hung it up in the closet again. Possessed of her
fantasy, Ella went later in the afternoon, when nobody was in that part of the
house, opened the closet, unhitched one of the articles, a mackintosh, and put
it on, with the waterproof cap belonging to it.
</p>
<p>
‘The mantle of Elijah!’ she said. ‘Would it might inspire me
to rival him, glorious genius that he is!’
</p>
<p>
Her eyes always grew wet when she thought like that, and she turned to look at
herself in the glass. <i>His</i> heart had beat inside that coat, and
<i>his</i> brain had worked under that hat at levels of thought she would never
reach. The consciousness of her weakness beside him made her feel quite sick.
Before she had got the things off her the door opened, and her husband entered
the room.
</p>
<p>
‘What the devil—’
</p>
<p>
She blushed, and removed them
</p>
<p>
‘I found them in the closet here,’ she said, ‘and put them on
in a freak. What have I else to do? You are always away!’
</p>
<p>
‘Always away? Well . . . ’
</p>
<p>
That evening she had a further talk with the landlady, who might herself have
nourished a half-tender regard for the poet, so ready was she to discourse
ardently about him.
</p>
<p>
‘You are interested in Mr. Trewe, I know, ma’am,’ she said;
‘and he has just sent to say that he is going to call to-morrow afternoon
to look up some books of his that he wants, if I’ll be in, and he may
select them from your room?’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes!’
</p>
<p>
‘You could very well meet Mr Trewe then, if you’d like to be in the
way!’
</p>
<p>
She promised with secret delight, and went to bed musing of him.
</p>
<p>
Next morning her husband observed: ‘I’ve been thinking of what you
said, Ell: that I have gone about a good deal and left you without much to
amuse you. Perhaps it’s true. To-day, as there’s not much sea,
I’ll take you with me on board the yacht.’
</p>
<p>
For the first time in her experience of such an offer Ella was not glad. But
she accepted it for the moment. The time for setting out drew near, and she
went to get ready. She stood reflecting. The longing to see the poet she was
now distinctly in love with overpowered all other considerations.
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t want to go,’ she said to herself. ‘I
can’t bear to be away! And I won’t go.’
</p>
<p>
She told her husband that she had changed her mind about wishing to sail. He
was indifferent, and went his way.
</p>
<p>
For the rest of the day the house was quiet, the children having gone out upon
the sands. The blinds waved in the sunshine to the soft, steady stroke of the
sea beyond the wall; and the notes of the Green Silesian band, a troop of
foreign gentlemen hired for the season, had drawn almost all the residents and
promenaders away from the vicinity of Coburg House. A knock was audible at the
door.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Marchmill did not hear any servant go to answer it, and she became
impatient. The books were in the room where she sat; but nobody came up. She
rang the bell.
</p>
<p>
‘There is some person waiting at the door,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘O no, ma’am! He’s gone long ago. I answered it.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hooper came in herself.
</p>
<p>
‘So disappointing!’ she said. ‘Mr. Trewe not coming after
all!’
</p>
<p>
‘But I heard him knock, I fancy!’
</p>
<p>
‘No; that was somebody inquiring for lodgings who came to the wrong
house. I forgot to tell you that Mr. Trewe sent a note just before lunch to say
I needn’t get any tea for him, as he should not require the books, and
wouldn’t come to select them.’
</p>
<p>
Ella was miserable, and for a long time could not even re-read his mournful
ballad on ‘Severed Lives,’ so aching was her erratic little heart,
and so tearful her eyes. When the children came in with wet stockings, and ran
up to her to tell her of their adventures, she could not feel that she cared
about them half as much as usual.
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
‘Mrs. Hooper, have you a photograph of—the gentleman who lived
here?’ She was getting to be curiously shy in mentioning his name.
</p>
<p>
‘Why, yes. It’s in the ornamental frame on the mantelpiece in your
own bedroom, ma’am.’
</p>
<p>
‘No; the Royal Duke and Duchess are in that.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, so they are; but he’s behind them. He belongs rightly to that
frame, which I bought on purpose; but as he went away he said: “Cover me
up from those strangers that are coming, for God’s sake. I don’t
want them staring at me, and I am sure they won’t want me staring at
them.” So I slipped in the Duke and Duchess temporarily in front of him,
as they had no frame, and Royalties are more suitable for letting furnished
than a private young man. If you take ’em out you’ll see him under.
Lord, ma’am, he wouldn’t mind if he knew it! He didn’t think
the next tenant would be such an attractive lady as you, or he wouldn’t
have thought of hiding himself; perhaps.’
</p>
<p>
‘Is he handsome?’ she asked timidly.
</p>
<p>
‘<i>I</i> call him so. Some, perhaps, wouldn’t.’
</p>
<p>
‘Should I?’ she asked, with eagerness.
</p>
<p>
‘I think you would, though some would say he’s more striking than
handsome; a large-eyed thoughtful fellow, you know, with a very electric flash
in his eye when he looks round quickly, such as you’d expect a poet to be
who doesn’t get his living by it.’
</p>
<p>
‘How old is he?’
</p>
<p>
‘Several years older than yourself, ma’am; about thirty-one or two,
I think.’
</p>
<p>
Ella was, as a matter of fact, a few months over thirty herself; but she did
not look nearly so much. Though so immature in nature, she was entering on that
tract of life in which emotional women begin to suspect that last love may be
stronger than first love; and she would soon, alas, enter on the still more
melancholy tract when at least the vainer ones of her sex shrink from receiving
a male visitor otherwise than with their backs to the window or the blinds half
down. She reflected on Mrs. Hooper’s remark, and said no more about age.
</p>
<p>
Just then a telegram was brought up. It came from her husband, who had gone
down the Channel as far as Budmouth with his friends in the yacht, and would
not be able to get back till next day.
</p>
<p>
After her light dinner Ella idled about the shore with the children till dusk,
thinking of the yet uncovered photograph in her room, with a serene sense of
something ecstatic to come. For, with the subtle luxuriousness of fancy in
which this young woman was an adept, on learning that her husband was to be
absent that night she had refrained from incontinently rushing upstairs and
opening the picture-frame, preferring to reserve the inspection till she could
be alone, and a more romantic tinge be imparted to the occasion by silence,
candles, solemn sea and stars outside, than was afforded by the garish
afternoon sunlight.
</p>
<p>
The children had been sent to bed, and Ella soon followed, though it was not
yet ten o’clock. To gratify her passionate curiosity she now made her
preparations, first getting rid of superfluous garments and putting on her
dressing-gown, then arranging a chair in front of the table and reading several
pages of Trewe’s tenderest utterances. Then she fetched the
portrait-frame to the light, opened the back, took out the likeness, and set it
up before her.
</p>
<p>
It was a striking countenance to look upon. The poet wore a luxuriant black
moustache and imperial, and a slouched hat which shaded the forehead. The large
dark eyes, described by the landlady, showed an unlimited capacity for misery;
they looked out from beneath well-shaped brows as if they were reading the
universe in the microcosm of the confronter’s face, and were not
altogether overjoyed at what the spectacle portended.
</p>
<p>
Ella murmured in her lowest, richest, tenderest tone: ‘And it’s
<i>you</i> who’ve so cruelly eclipsed me these many times!’
</p>
<p>
As she gazed long at the portrait she fell into thought, till her eyes filled
with tears, and she touched the cardboard with her lips. Then she laughed with
a nervous lightness, and wiped her eyes.
</p>
<p>
She thought how wicked she was, a woman having a husband and three children, to
let her mind stray to a stranger in this unconscionable manner. No, he was not
a stranger! She knew his thoughts and feelings as well as she knew her own;
they were, in fact, the self-same thoughts and feelings as hers, which her
husband distinctly lacked; perhaps luckily for himself; considering that he had
to provide for family expenses.
</p>
<p>
‘He’s nearer my real self, he’s more intimate with the real
me than Will is, after all, even though I’ve never seen him,’ she
said.
</p>
<p>
She laid his book and picture on the table at the bedside, and when she was
reclining on the pillow she re-read those of Robert Trewe’s verses which
she had marked from time to time as most touching and true. Putting these
aside, she set up the photograph on its edge upon the coverlet, and
contemplated it as she lay. Then she scanned again by the light of the candle
the half-obliterated pencillings on the wall-paper beside her head. There they
were—phrases, couplets, <i>bouts-rimés</i>, beginnings and middles of
lines, ideas in the rough, like Shelley’s scraps, and the least of them
so intense, so sweet, so palpitating, that it seemed as if his very breath,
warm and loving, fanned her cheeks from those walls, walls that had surrounded
his head times and times as they surrounded her own now. He must often have put
up his hand so—with the pencil in it. Yes, the writing was sideways, as
it would be if executed by one who extended his arm thus.
</p>
<p>
These inscribed shapes of the poet’s world,
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘Forms more real than living man,<br/>
Nurslings of immortality,’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
were, no doubt, the thoughts and spirit-strivings which had come to him in the
dead of night, when he could let himself go and have no fear of the frost of
criticism. No doubt they had often been written up hastily by the light of the
moon, the rays of the lamp, in the blue-grey dawn, in full daylight perhaps
never. And now her hair was dragging where his arm had lain when he secured the
fugitive fancies; she was sleeping on a poet’s lips, immersed in the very
essence of him, permeated by his spirit as by an ether.
</p>
<p>
While she was dreaming the minutes away thus, a footstep came upon the stairs,
and in a moment she heard her husband’s heavy step on the landing
immediately without.
</p>
<p>
‘Ell, where are you?’
</p>
<p>
What possessed her she could not have described, but, with an instinctive
objection to let her husband know what she had been doing, she slipped the
photograph under the pillow just as he flung open the door, with the air of a
man who had dined not badly.
</p>
<p>
‘O, I beg pardon,’ said William Marchmill. ‘Have you a
headache? I am afraid I have disturbed you.’
</p>
<p>
‘No, I’ve not got a headache,’ said she. ‘How is it
you’ve come?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, we found we could get back in very good time after all, and I
didn’t want to make another day of it, because of going somewhere else
to-morrow.’
</p>
<p>
‘Shall I come down again?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no. I’m as tired as a dog. I’ve had a good feed, and I
shall turn in straight off. I want to get out at six o’clock to-morrow if
I can . . . I shan’t disturb you by my getting up; it will be long before
you are awake.’ And he came forward into the room.
</p>
<p>
While her eyes followed his movements, Ella softly pushed the photograph
further out of sight.
</p>
<p>
‘Sure you’re not ill?’ he asked, bending over her.
</p>
<p>
‘No, only wicked!’
</p>
<p>
‘Never mind that.’ And he stooped and kissed her.
</p>
<p>
Next morning Marchmill was called at six o’clock; and in waking and
yawning she heard him muttering to himself: ‘What the deuce is this
that’s been crackling under me so?’ Imagining her asleep he
searched round him and withdrew something. Through her half-opened eyes she
perceived it to be Mr. Trewe.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I’m damned!’ her husband exclaimed.
</p>
<p>
‘What, dear?’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘O, you are awake? Ha! ha!’
</p>
<p>
‘What <i>do</i> you mean?’
</p>
<p>
‘Some bloke’s photograph—a friend of our landlady’s, I
suppose. I wonder how it came here; whisked off the table by accident perhaps
when they were making the bed.’
</p>
<p>
‘I was looking at it yesterday, and it must have dropped in then.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, he’s a friend of yours? Bless his picturesque heart!’
</p>
<p>
Ella’s loyalty to the object of her admiration could not endure to hear
him ridiculed. ‘He’s a clever man!’ she said, with a tremor
in her gentle voice which she herself felt to be absurdly uncalled for.
</p>
<p>
‘He is a rising poet—the gentleman who occupied two of these rooms
before we came, though I’ve never seen him.’
</p>
<p>
‘How do you know, if you’ve never seen him?’
</p>
<p>
‘Mrs. Hooper told me when she showed me the photograph.’
</p>
<p>
‘O; well, I must up and be off. I shall be home rather early. Sorry I
can’t take you to-day, dear. Mind the children don’t go getting
drowned.’
</p>
<p>
That day Mrs. Marchmill inquired if Mr. Trewe were likely to call at any other
time.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said Mrs. Hooper. ‘He’s coming this day week to
stay with a friend near here till you leave. He’ll be sure to
call.’
</p>
<p>
Marchmill did return quite early in the afternoon; and, opening some letters
which had arrived in his absence, declared suddenly that he and his family
would have to leave a week earlier than they had expected to do—in short,
in three days.
</p>
<p>
‘Surely we can stay a week longer?’ she pleaded. ‘I like it
here.’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t. It is getting rather slow.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then you might leave me and the children!’
</p>
<p>
‘How perverse you are, Ell! What’s the use? And have to come to
fetch you! No: we’ll all return together; and we’ll make out our
time in North Wales or Brighton a little later on. Besides, you’ve three
days longer yet.’
</p>
<p>
It seemed to be her doom not to meet the man for whose rival talent she had a
despairing admiration, and to whose person she was now absolutely attached. Yet
she determined to make a last effort; and having gathered from her landlady
that Trewe was living in a lonely spot not far from the fashionable town on the
Island opposite, she crossed over in the packet from the neighbouring pier the
following afternoon.
</p>
<p>
What a useless journey it was! Ella knew but vaguely where the house stood, and
when she fancied she had found it, and ventured to inquire of a pedestrian if
he lived there, the answer returned by the man was that he did not know. And if
he did live there, how could she call upon him? Some women might have the
assurance to do it, but she had not. How crazy he would think her. She might
have asked him to call upon her, perhaps; but she had not the courage for that,
either. She lingered mournfully about the picturesque seaside eminence till it
was time to return to the town and enter the steamer for recrossing, reaching
home for dinner without having been greatly missed.
</p>
<p>
At the last moment, unexpectedly enough, her husband said that he should have
no objection to letting her and the children stay on till the end of the week,
since she wished to do so, if she felt herself able to get home without him.
She concealed the pleasure this extension of time gave her; and Marchmill went
off the next morning alone.
</p>
<p>
But the week passed, and Trewe did not call.
</p>
<p>
On Saturday morning the remaining members of the Marchmill family departed from
the place which had been productive of so much fervour in her. The dreary,
dreary train; the sun shining in moted beams upon the hot cushions; the dusty
permanent way; the mean rows of wire—these things were her accompaniment:
while out of the window the deep blue sea-levels disappeared from her gaze, and
with them her poet’s home. Heavy-hearted, she tried to read, and wept
instead.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Marchmill was in a thriving way of business, and he and his family lived in
a large new house, which stood in rather extensive grounds a few miles outside
the city wherein he carried on his trade. Ella’s life was lonely here, as
the suburban life is apt to be, particularly at certain seasons; and she had
ample time to indulge her taste for lyric and elegiac composition. She had
hardly got back when she encountered a piece by Robert Trewe in the new number
of her favourite magazine, which must have been written almost immediately
before her visit to Solentsea, for it contained the very couplet she had seen
pencilled on the wallpaper by the bed, and Mrs. Hooper had declared to be
recent. Ella could resist no longer, but seizing a pen impulsively, wrote to
him as a brother-poet, using the name of John Ivy, congratulating him in her
letter on his triumphant executions in metre and rhythm of thoughts that moved
his soul, as compared with her own brow-beaten efforts in the same pathetic
trade.
</p>
<p>
To this address there came a response in a few days, little as she had dared to
hope for it—a civil and brief note, in which the young poet stated that,
though he was not well acquainted with Mr. Ivy’s verse, he recalled the
name as being one he had seen attached to some very promising pieces; that he
was glad to gain Mr. Ivy’s acquaintance by letter, and should certainly
look with much interest for his productions in the future.
</p>
<p>
There must have been something juvenile or timid in her own epistle, as one
ostensibly coming from a man, she declared to herself; for Trewe quite adopted
the tone of an elder and superior in this reply. But what did it matter? he had
replied; he had written to her with his own hand from that very room she knew
so well, for he was now back again in his quarters.
</p>
<p>
The correspondence thus begun was continued for two months or more, Ella
Marchmill sending him from time to time some that she considered to be the best
of her pieces, which he very kindly accepted, though he did not say he
sedulously read them, nor did he send her any of his own in return. Ella would
have been more hurt at this than she was if she had not known that Trewe
laboured under the impression that she was one of his own sex.
</p>
<p>
Yet the situation was unsatisfactory. A flattering little voice told her that,
were he only to see her, matters would be otherwise. No doubt she would have
helped on this by making a frank confession of womanhood, to begin with, if
something had not happened, to her delight, to render it unnecessary. A friend
of her husband’s, the editor of the most important newspaper in the city
and county, who was dining with them one day, observed during their
conversation about the poet that his (the editor’s) brother the
landscape-painter was a friend of Mr. Trewe’s, and that the two men were
at that very moment in Wales together.
</p>
<p>
Ella was slightly acquainted with the editor’s brother. The next morning
down she sat and wrote, inviting him to stay at her house for a short time on
his way back, and requesting him to bring with him, if practicable, his
companion Mr. Trewe, whose acquaintance she was anxious to make. The answer
arrived after some few days. Her correspondent and his friend Trewe would have
much satisfaction in accepting her invitation on their way southward, which
would be on such and such a day in the following week.
</p>
<p>
Ella was blithe and buoyant. Her scheme had succeeded; her beloved though as
yet unseen one was coming. “Behold, he standeth behind our wall; he
looked forth at the windows, showing himself through the lattice,” she
thought ecstatically. “And, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and
gone, the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is
come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.”
</p>
<p>
But it was necessary to consider the details of lodging and feeding him. This
she did most solicitously, and awaited the pregnant day and hour.
</p>
<p>
It was about five in the afternoon when she heard a ring at the door and the
editor’s brother’s voice in the hall. Poetess as she was, or as she
thought herself, she had not been too sublime that day to dress with infinite
trouble in a fashionable robe of rich material, having a faint resemblance to
the <i>chiton</i> of the Greeks, a style just then in vogue among ladies of an
artistic and romantic turn, which had been obtained by Ella of her Bond Street
dressmaker when she was last in London. Her visitor entered the drawing-room.
She looked towards his rear; nobody else came through the door. Where, in the
name of the God of Love, was Robert Trewe?
</p>
<p>
‘O, I’m sorry,’ said the painter, after their introductory
words had been spoken. ‘Trewe is a curious fellow, you know, Mrs.
Marchmill. He said he’d come; then he said he couldn’t. He’s
rather dusty. We’ve been doing a few miles with knapsacks, you know; and
he wanted to get on home.’
</p>
<p>
‘He—he’s not coming?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s not; and he asked me to make his apologies.’
</p>
<p>
‘When did you p-p-part from him?’ she asked, her nether lip
starting off quivering so much that it was like a <i>tremolo</i>-stop opened in
her speech. She longed to run away from this dreadful bore and cry her eyes
out.
</p>
<p>
‘Just now, in the turnpike road yonder there.’
</p>
<p>
‘What! he has actually gone past my gates?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes. When we got to them—handsome gates they are, too, the finest
bit of modern wrought-iron work I have seen—when we came to them we
stopped, talking there a little while, and then he wished me good-bye and went
on. The truth is, he’s a little bit depressed just now, and doesn’t
want to see anybody. He’s a very good fellow, and a warm friend, but a
little uncertain and gloomy sometimes; he thinks too much of things. His poetry
is rather too erotic and passionate, you know, for some tastes; and he has just
come in for a terrible slating from the —— <i>Review</i> that was
published yesterday; he saw a copy of it at the station by accident. Perhaps
you’ve read it?’
</p>
<p>
‘No.’
</p>
<p>
‘So much the better. O, it is not worth thinking of; just one of those
articles written to order, to please the narrow-minded set of subscribers upon
whom the circulation depends. But he’s upset by it. He says it is the
misrepresentation that hurts him so; that, though he can stand a fair attack,
he can’t stand lies that he’s powerless to refute and stop from
spreading. That’s just Trewe’s weak point. He lives so much by
himself that these things affect him much more than they would if he were in
the bustle of fashionable or commercial life. So he wouldn’t come here,
making the excuse that it all looked so new and monied—if you’ll
pardon—’
</p>
<p>
‘But—he must have known—there was sympathy here! Has he never
said anything about getting letters from this address?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes, he has, from John Ivy—perhaps a relative of yours, he
thought, visiting here at the time?’
</p>
<p>
‘Did he—like Ivy, did he say?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I don’t know that he took any great interest in Ivy.’
</p>
<p>
‘Or in his poems?’
</p>
<p>
‘Or in his poems—so far as I know, that is.’
</p>
<p>
Robert Trewe took no interest in her house, in her poems, or in their writer.
As soon as she could get away she went into the nursery and tried to let off
her emotion by unnecessarily kissing the children, till she had a sudden sense
of disgust at being reminded how plain-looking they were, like their father.
</p>
<p>
The obtuse and single-minded landscape-painter never once perceived from her
conversation that it was only Trewe she wanted, and not himself. He made the
best of his visit, seeming to enjoy the society of Ella’s husband, who
also took a great fancy to him, and showed him everywhere about the
neighbourhood, neither of them noticing Ella’s mood.
</p>
<p>
The painter had been gone only a day or two when, while sitting upstairs alone
one morning, she glanced over the London paper just arrived, and read the
following paragraph:-
</p>
<p class="center">
‘SUICIDE OF A POET
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘Mr. Robert Trewe, who has been favourably known for some years as one of
our rising lyrists, committed suicide at his lodgings at Solentsea on Saturday
evening last by shooting himself in the right temple with a revolver. Readers
hardly need to be reminded that Mr. Trewe has recently attracted the attention
of a much wider public than had hitherto known him, by his new volume of verse,
mostly of an impassioned kind, entitled “Lyrics to a Woman
Unknown,” which has been already favourably noticed in these pages for
the extraordinary gamut of feeling it traverses, and which has been made the
subject of a severe, if not ferocious, criticism in the —— Review.
It is supposed, though not certainly known, that the article may have partially
conduced to the sad act, as a copy of the review in question was found on his
writing-table; and he has been observed to be in a somewhat depressed state of
mind since the critique appeared.’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Then came the report of the inquest, at which the following letter was read, it
having been addressed to a friend at a distance:-
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘DEAR ——,—Before these lines reach your hands I shall
be delivered from the inconveniences of seeing, hearing, and knowing more of
the things around me. I will not trouble you by giving my reasons for the step
I have taken, though I can assure you they were sound and logical. Perhaps had
I been blessed with a mother, or a sister, or a female friend of another sort
tenderly devoted to me, I might have thought it worth while to continue my
present existence. I have long dreamt of such an unattainable creature, as you
know, and she, this undiscoverable, elusive one, inspired my last volume; the
imaginary woman alone, for, in spite of what has been said in some quarters,
there is no real woman behind the title. She has continued to the last
unrevealed, unmet, unwon. I think it desirable to mention this in order that no
blame may attach to any real woman as having been the cause of my decease by
cruel or cavalier treatment of me. Tell my landlady that I am sorry to have
caused her this unpleasantness; but my occupancy of the rooms will soon be
forgotten. There are ample funds in my name at the bank to pay all expenses. R.
TREWE.’
</p>
<p>
Ella sat for a while as if stunned, then rushed into the adjoining chamber and
flung herself upon her face on the bed.
</p>
<p>
Her grief and distraction shook her to pieces; and she lay in this frenzy of
sorrow for more than an hour. Broken words came every now and then from her
quivering lips: ‘O, if he had only known of me—known of
me—me! . . . O, if I had only once met him—only once; and put my
hand upon his hot forehead—kissed him—let him know how I loved
him—that I would have suffered shame and scorn, would have lived and
died, for him! Perhaps it would have saved his dear life! . . . But no—it
was not allowed! God is a jealous God; and that happiness was not for him and
me!’
</p>
<p>
All possibilities were over; the meeting was stultified. Yet it was almost
visible to her in her fantasy even now, though it could never be
substantiated—
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘The hour which might have been, yet might not be,<br/>
Which man’s and woman’s heart conceived and bore,<br/>
Yet whereof life was barren.’
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
She wrote to the landlady at Solentsea in the third person, in as subdued a
style as she could command, enclosing a postal order for a sovereign, and
informing Mrs. Hooper that Mrs. Marchmill had seen in the papers the sad
account of the poet’s death, and having been, as Mrs. Hooper was aware,
much interested in Mr. Trewe during her stay at Coburg House, she would be
obliged if Mrs. Hooper could obtain a small portion of his hair before his
coffin was closed down, and send it her as a memorial of him, as also the
photograph that was in the frame.
</p>
<p>
By the return-post a letter arrived containing what had been requested. Ella
wept over the portrait and secured it in her private drawer; the lock of hair
she tied with white ribbon and put in her bosom, whence she drew it and kissed
it every now and then in some unobserved nook.
</p>
<p>
‘What’s the matter?’ said her husband, looking up from his
newspaper on one of these occasions. ‘Crying over something? A lock of
hair? Whose is it?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s dead!’ she murmured.
</p>
<p>
‘Who?’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t want to tell you, Will, just now, unless you
insist!’ she said, a sob hanging heavy in her voice.
</p>
<p>
‘O, all right.’
</p>
<p>
‘Do you mind my refusing? I will tell you some day.’
</p>
<p>
‘It doesn’t matter in the least, of course.’
</p>
<p>
He walked away whistling a few bars of no tune in particular; and when he had
got down to his factory in the city the subject came into Marchmill’s
head again.
</p>
<p>
He, too, was aware that a suicide had taken place recently at the house they
had occupied at Solentsea. Having seen the volume of poems in his wife’s
hand of late, and heard fragments of the landlady’s conversation about
Trewe when they were her tenants, he all at once said to himself; ‘Why of
course it’s he! How the devil did she get to know him? What sly animals
women are!’
</p>
<p>
Then he placidly dismissed the matter, and went on with his daily affairs. By
this time Ella at home had come to a determination. Mrs. Hooper, in sending the
hair and photograph, had informed her of the day of the funeral; and as the
morning and noon wore on an overpowering wish to know where they were laying
him took possession of the sympathetic woman. Caring very little now what her
husband or any one else might think of her eccentricities; she wrote Marchmill
a brief note, stating that she was called away for the afternoon and evening,
but would return on the following morning. This she left on his desk, and
having given the same information to the servants, went out of the house on
foot.
</p>
<p>
When Mr. Marchmill reached home early in the afternoon the servants looked
anxious. The nurse took him privately aside, and hinted that her
mistress’s sadness during the past few days had been such that she feared
she had gone out to drown herself. Marchmill reflected. Upon the whole he
thought that she had not done that. Without saying whither he was bound he also
started off, telling them not to sit up for him. He drove to the
railway-station, and took a ticket for Solentsea.
</p>
<p>
It was dark when he reached the place, though he had come by a fast train, and
he knew that if his wife had preceded him thither it could only have been by a
slower train, arriving not a great while before his own. The season at
Solentsea was now past: the parade was gloomy, and the flys were few and cheap.
He asked the way to the Cemetery, and soon reached it. The gate was locked, but
the keeper let him in, declaring, however, that there was nobody within the
precincts. Although it was not late, the autumnal darkness had now become
intense; and he found some difficulty in keeping to the serpentine path which
led to the quarter where, as the man had told him, the one or two interments
for the day had taken place. He stepped upon the grass, and, stumbling over
some pegs, stooped now and then to discern if possible a figure against the
sky.
</p>
<p>
He could see none; but lighting on a spot where the soil was trodden, beheld a
crouching object beside a newly made grave. She heard him, and sprang up.
</p>
<p>
‘Ell, how silly this is!’ he said indignantly. ‘Running away
from home—I never heard such a thing! Of course I am not jealous of this
unfortunate man; but it is too ridiculous that you, a married woman with three
children and a fourth coming, should go losing your head like this over a dead
lover! . . . Do you know you were locked in? You might not have been able to
get out all night.’
</p>
<p>
She did not answer.
</p>
<p>
‘I hope it didn’t go far between you and him, for your own
sake.’
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t insult me, Will.’
</p>
<p>
‘Mind, I won’t have any more of this sort of thing; do you
hear?’
</p>
<p>
‘Very well,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
He drew her arm within his own, and conducted her out of the Cemetery. It was
impossible to get back that night; and not wishing to be recognized in their
present sorry condition, he took her to a miserable little coffee-house close
to the station, whence they departed early in the morning, travelling almost
without speaking, under the sense that it was one of those dreary situations
occurring in married life which words could not mend, and reaching their own
door at noon.
</p>
<p>
The months passed, and neither of the twain ever ventured to start a
conversation upon this episode. Ella seemed to be only too frequently in a sad
and listless mood, which might almost have been called pining. The time was
approaching when she would have to undergo the stress of childbirth for a
fourth time, and that apparently did not tend to raise her spirits.
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t think I shall get over it this time!’ she said one
day.
</p>
<p>
‘Pooh! what childish foreboding! Why shouldn’t it be as well now as
ever?’
</p>
<p>
She shook her head. ‘I feel almost sure I am going to die; and I should
be glad, if it were not for Nelly, and Frank, and Tiny.’
</p>
<p>
‘And me!’
</p>
<p>
‘You’ll soon find somebody to fill my place,’ she murmured,
with a sad smile. ‘And you’ll have a perfect right to; I assure you
of that.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ell, you are not thinking still about that—poetical friend of
yours?’
</p>
<p>
She neither admitted nor denied the charge. ‘I am not going to get over
my illness this time,’ she reiterated. ‘Something tells me I
shan’t.’
</p>
<p>
This view of things was rather a bad beginning, as it usually is; and, in fact,
six weeks later, in the month of May, she was lying in her room, pulseless and
bloodless, with hardly strength enough left to follow up one feeble breath with
another, the infant for whose unnecessary life she was slowly parting with her
own being fat and well. Just before her death she spoke to Marchmill softly:-
</p>
<p>
‘Will, I want to confess to you the entire circumstances of
that—about you know what—that time we visited Solentsea. I
can’t tell what possessed me—how I could forget you so, my husband!
But I had got into a morbid state: I thought you had been unkind; that you had
neglected me; that you weren’t up to my intellectual level, while he was,
and far above it. I wanted a fuller appreciator, perhaps, rather than another
lover—’
</p>
<p>
She could get no further then for very exhaustion; and she went off in sudden
collapse a few hours later, without having said anything more to her husband on
the subject of her love for the poet. William Marchmill, in truth, like most
husbands of several years’ standing, was little disturbed by
retrospective jealousies, and had not shown the least anxiety to press her for
confessions concerning a man dead and gone beyond any power of inconveniencing
him more.
</p>
<p>
But when she had been buried a couple of years it chanced one day that, in
turning over some forgotten papers that he wished to destroy before his second
wife entered the house, he lighted on a lock of hair in an envelope, with the
photograph of the deceased poet, a date being written on the back in his late
wife’s hand. It was that of the time they spent at Solentsea.
</p>
<p>
Marchmill looked long and musingly at the hair and portrait, for something
struck him. Fetching the little boy who had been the death of his mother, now a
noisy toddler, he took him on his knee, held the lock of hair against the
child’s head, and set up the photograph on the table behind, so that he
could closely compare the features each countenance presented. There were
undoubtedly strong traces of resemblance; the dreamy and peculiar expression of
the poet’s face sat, as the transmitted idea, upon the child’s, and
the hair was of the same hue.
</p>
<p>
‘I’m damned if I didn’t think so!’ murmured Marchmill.
‘Then she <i>did</i> play me false with that fellow at the lodgings! Let
me see: the dates—the second week in August . . . the third week in May .
. . Yes . . . yes . . . Get away, you poor little brat! You are nothing to
me!’
</p>
<p class="p2">
1893.
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap03"/>THE THREE STRANGERS</h2>
<p>
Among the few features of agricultural England which retain an appearance but
little modified by the lapse of centuries, may be reckoned the high, grassy and
furzy downs, coombs, or ewe-leases, as they are indifferently called, that fill
a large area of certain counties in the south and south-west. If any mark of
human occupation is met with hereon, it usually takes the form of the solitary
cottage of some shepherd.
</p>
<p>
Fifty years ago such a lonely cottage stood on such a down, and may possibly be
standing there now. In spite of its loneliness, however, the spot, by actual
measurement, was not more than five miles from a county-town. Yet that affected
it little. Five miles of irregular upland, during the long inimical seasons,
with their sleets, snows, rains, and mists, afford withdrawing space enough to
isolate a Timon or a Nebuchadnezzar; much less, in fair weather, to please that
less repellent tribe, the poets, philosophers, artists, and others who
‘conceive and meditate of pleasant things.’
</p>
<p>
Some old earthen camp or barrow, some clump of trees, at least some starved
fragment of ancient hedge is usually taken advantage of in the erection of
these forlorn dwellings. But, in the present case, such a kind of shelter had
been disregarded. Higher Crowstairs, as the house was called, stood quite
detached and undefended. The only reason for its precise situation seemed to be
the crossing of two footpaths at right angles hard by, which may have crossed
there and thus for a good five hundred years. Hence the house was exposed to
the elements on all sides. But, though the wind up here blew unmistakably when
it did blow, and the rain hit hard whenever it fell, the various weathers of
the winter season were not quite so formidable on the coomb as they were
imagined to be by dwellers on low ground. The raw rimes were not so pernicious
as in the hollows, and the frosts were scarcely so severe. When the shepherd
and his family who tenanted the house were pitied for their sufferings from the
exposure, they said that upon the whole they were less inconvenienced by
‘wuzzes and flames’ (hoarses and phlegms) than when they had lived
by the stream of a snug neighbouring valley.
</p>
<p>
The night of March 28, 182-, was precisely one of the nights that were wont to
call forth these expressions of commiseration. The level rainstorm smote walls,
slopes, and hedges like the clothyard shafts of Senlac and Crecy. Such sheep
and outdoor animals as had no shelter stood with their buttocks to the winds;
while the tails of little birds trying to roost on some scraggy thorn were
blown inside-out like umbrellas. The gable-end of the cottage was stained with
wet, and the eavesdroppings flapped against the wall. Yet never was
commiseration for the shepherd more misplaced. For that cheerful rustic was
entertaining a large party in glorification of the christening of his second
girl.
</p>
<p>
The guests had arrived before the rain began to fall, and they were all now
assembled in the chief or living room of the dwelling. A glance into the
apartment at eight o’clock on this eventful evening would have resulted
in the opinion that it was as cosy and comfortable a nook as could be wished
for in boisterous weather. The calling of its inhabitant was proclaimed by a
number of highly-polished sheep-crooks without stems that were hung
ornamentally over the fireplace, the curl of each shining crook varying from
the antiquated type engraved in the patriarchal pictures of old family Bibles
to the most approved fashion of the last local sheep-fair. The room was lighted
by half-a-dozen candles, having wicks only a trifle smaller than the grease
which enveloped them, in candlesticks that were never used but at high-days,
holy-days, and family feasts. The lights were scattered about the room, two of
them standing on the chimney-piece. This position of candles was in itself
significant. Candles on the chimney-piece always meant a party.
</p>
<p>
On the hearth, in front of a back-brand to give substance, blazed a fire of
thorns, that crackled ‘like the laughter of the fool.’
</p>
<p>
Nineteen persons were gathered here. Of these, five women, wearing gowns of
various bright hues, sat in chairs along the wall; girls shy and not shy filled
the window-bench; four men, including Charley Jake the hedge-carpenter, Elijah
New the parish-clerk, and John Pitcher, a neighbouring dairyman, the
shepherd’s father-in-law, lolled in the settle; a young man and maid, who
were blushing over tentative <i>pourparlers</i> on a life-companionship, sat
beneath the corner-cupboard; and an elderly engaged man of fifty or upward
moved restlessly about from spots where his betrothed was not to the spot where
she was. Enjoyment was pretty general, and so much the more prevailed in being
unhampered by conventional restrictions. Absolute confidence in each
other’s good opinion begat perfect ease, while the finishing stroke of
manner, amounting to a truly princely serenity, was lent to the majority by the
absence of any expression or trait denoting that they wished to get on in the
world, enlarge their minds, or do any eclipsing thing whatever—which
nowadays so generally nips the bloom and <i>bonhomie</i> of all except the two
extremes of the social scale.
</p>
<p>
Shepherd Fennel had married well, his wife being a dairyman’s daughter
from a vale at a distance, who brought fifty guineas in her pocket—and
kept them there, till they should be required for ministering to the needs of a
coming family. This frugal woman had been somewhat exercised as to the
character that should be given to the gathering. A sit-still party had its
advantages; but an undisturbed position of ease in chairs and settles was apt
to lead on the men to such an unconscionable deal of toping that they would
sometimes fairly drink the house dry. A dancing-party was the alternative; but
this, while avoiding the foregoing objection on the score of good drink, had a
counterbalancing disadvantage in the matter of good victuals, the ravenous
appetites engendered by the exercise causing immense havoc in the buttery.
Shepherdess Fennel fell back upon the intermediate plan of mingling short
dances with short periods of talk and singing, so as to hinder any ungovernable
rage in either. But this scheme was entirely confined to her own gentle mind:
the shepherd himself was in the mood to exhibit the most reckless phases of
hospitality.
</p>
<p>
The fiddler was a boy of those parts, about twelve years of age, who had a
wonderful dexterity in jigs and reels, though his fingers were so small and
short as to necessitate a constant shifting for the high notes, from which he
scrambled back to the first position with sounds not of unmixed purity of tone.
At seven the shrill tweedle-dee of this youngster had begun, accompanied by a
booming ground-bass from Elijah New, the parish-clerk, who had thoughtfully
brought with him his favourite musical instrument, the serpent. Dancing was
instantaneous, Mrs. Fennel privately enjoining the players on no account to let
the dance exceed the length of a quarter of an hour.
</p>
<p>
But Elijah and the boy, in the excitement of their position, quite forgot the
injunction. Moreover, Oliver Giles, a man of seventeen, one of the dancers, who
was enamoured of his partner, a fair girl of thirty-three rolling years, had
recklessly handed a new crown-piece to the musicians, as a bribe to keep going
as long as they had muscle and wind. Mrs. Fennel, seeing the steam begin to
generate on the countenances of her guests, crossed over and touched the
fiddler’s elbow and put her hand on the serpent’s mouth. But they
took no notice, and fearing she might lose her character of genial hostess if
she were to interfere too markedly, she retired and sat down helpless. And so
the dance whizzed on with cumulative fury, the performers moving in their
planet-like courses, direct and retrograde, from apogee to perigee, till the
hand of the well-kicked clock at the bottom of the room had travelled over the
circumference of an hour.
</p>
<p>
While these cheerful events were in course of enactment within Fennel’s
pastoral dwelling, an incident having considerable bearing on the party had
occurred in the gloomy night without. Mrs. Fennel’s concern about the
growing fierceness of the dance corresponded in point of time with the ascent
of a human figure to the solitary hill of Higher Crowstairs from the direction
of the distant town. This personage strode on through the rain without a pause,
following the little-worn path which, further on in its course, skirted the
shepherd’s cottage.
</p>
<p>
It was nearly the time of full moon, and on this account, though the sky was
lined with a uniform sheet of dripping cloud, ordinary objects out of doors
were readily visible. The sad wan light revealed the lonely pedestrian to be a
man of supple frame; his gait suggested that he had somewhat passed the period
of perfect and instinctive agility, though not so far as to be otherwise than
rapid of motion when occasion required. At a rough guess, he might have been
about forty years of age. He appeared tall, but a recruiting sergeant, or other
person accustomed to the judging of men’s heights by the eye, would have
discerned that this was chiefly owing to his gauntness, and that he was not
more than five-feet-eight or nine.
</p>
<p>
Notwithstanding the regularity of his tread, there was caution in it, as in
that of one who mentally feels his way; and despite the fact that it was not a
black coat nor a dark garment of any sort that he wore, there was something
about him which suggested that he naturally belonged to the black-coated tribes
of men. His clothes were of fustian, and his boots hobnailed, yet in his
progress he showed not the mud-accustomed bearing of hobnailed and fustianed
peasantry.
</p>
<p>
By the time that he had arrived abreast of the shepherd’s premises the
rain came down, or rather came along, with yet more determined violence. The
outskirts of the little settlement partially broke the force of wind and rain,
and this induced him to stand still. The most salient of the shepherd’s
domestic erections was an empty sty at the forward corner of his hedgeless
garden, for in these latitudes the principle of masking the homelier features
of your establishment by a conventional frontage was unknown. The
traveller’s eye was attracted to this small building by the pallid shine
of the wet slates that covered it. He turned aside, and, finding it empty,
stood under the pent-roof for shelter.
</p>
<p>
While he stood, the boom of the serpent within the adjacent house, and the
lesser strains of the fiddler, reached the spot as an accompaniment to the
surging hiss of the flying rain on the sod, its louder beating on the
cabbage-leaves of the garden, on the eight or ten beehives just discernible by
the path, and its dripping from the eaves into a row of buckets and pans that
had been placed under the walls of the cottage. For at Higher Crowstairs, as at
all such elevated domiciles, the grand difficulty of housekeeping was an
insufficiency of water; and a casual rainfall was utilized by turning out, as
catchers, every utensil that the house contained. Some queer stories might be
told of the contrivances for economy in suds and dish-waters that are
absolutely necessitated in upland habitations during the droughts of summer.
But at this season there were no such exigencies; a mere acceptance of what the
skies bestowed was sufficient for an abundant store.
</p>
<p>
At last the notes of the serpent ceased and the house was silent. This
cessation of activity aroused the solitary pedestrian from the reverie into
which he had lapsed, and, emerging from the shed, with an apparently new
intention, he walked up the path to the house-door. Arrived here, his first act
was to kneel down on a large stone beside the row of vessels, and to drink a
copious draught from one of them. Having quenched his thirst he rose and lifted
his hand to knock, but paused with his eye upon the panel. Since the dark
surface of the wood revealed absolutely nothing, it was evident that he must be
mentally looking through the door, as if he wished to measure thereby all the
possibilities that a house of this sort might include, and how they might bear
upon the question of his entry.
</p>
<p>
In his indecision he turned and surveyed the scene around. Not a soul was
anywhere visible. The garden-path stretched downward from his feet, gleaming
like the track of a snail; the roof of the little well (mostly dry), the
well-cover, the top rail of the garden-gate, were varnished with the same dull
liquid glaze; while, far away in the vale, a faint whiteness of more than usual
extent showed that the rivers were high in the meads. Beyond all this winked a
few bleared lamplights through the beating drops—lights that denoted the
situation of the county-town from which he had appeared to come. The absence of
all notes of life in that direction seemed to clinch his intentions, and he
knocked at the door.
</p>
<p>
Within, a desultory chat had taken the place of movement and musical sound. The
hedge-carpenter was suggesting a song to the company, which nobody just then
was inclined to undertake, so that the knock afforded a not unwelcome
diversion.
</p>
<p>
‘Walk in!’ said the shepherd promptly.
</p>
<p>
The latch clicked upward, and out of the night our pedestrian appeared upon the
door-mat. The shepherd arose, snuffed two of the nearest candles, and turned to
look at him.
</p>
<p>
Their light disclosed that the stranger was dark in complexion and not
unprepossessing as to feature. His hat, which for a moment he did not remove,
hung low over his eyes, without concealing that they were large, open, and
determined, moving with a flash rather than a glance round the room. He seemed
pleased with his survey, and, baring his shaggy head, said, in a rich deep
voice, ‘The rain is so heavy, friends, that I ask leave to come in and
rest awhile.’
</p>
<p>
‘To be sure, stranger,’ said the shepherd. ‘And faith,
you’ve been lucky in choosing your time, for we are having a bit of a
fling for a glad cause—though, to be sure, a man could hardly wish that
glad cause to happen more than once a year.’
</p>
<p>
‘Nor less,’ spoke up a woman. ‘For ’tis best to get
your family over and done with, as soon as you can, so as to be all the earlier
out of the fag o’t.’
</p>
<p>
‘And what may be this glad cause?’ asked the stranger.
</p>
<p>
‘A birth and christening,’ said the shepherd.
</p>
<p>
The stranger hoped his host might not be made unhappy either by too many or too
few of such episodes, and being invited by a gesture to a pull at the mug, he
readily acquiesced. His manner, which, before entering, had been so dubious,
was now altogether that of a careless and candid man.
</p>
<p>
‘Late to be traipsing athwart this coomb—hey?’ said the
engaged man of fifty.
</p>
<p>
‘Late it is, master, as you say.—I’ll take a seat in the
chimney-corner, if you have nothing to urge against it, ma’am; for I am a
little moist on the side that was next the rain.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Shepherd Fennel assented, and made room for the self-invited comer, who,
having got completely inside the chimney-corner, stretched out his legs and his
arms with the expansiveness of a person quite at home.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, I am rather cracked in the vamp,’ he said freely, seeing that
the eyes of the shepherd’s wife fell upon his boots, ‘and I am not
well fitted either. I have had some rough times lately, and have been forced to
pick up what I can get in the way of wearing, but I must find a suit better fit
for working-days when I reach home.’
</p>
<p>
‘One of hereabouts?’ she inquired.
</p>
<p>
‘Not quite that—further up the country.’
</p>
<p>
‘I thought so. And so be I; and by your tongue you come from my
neighbourhood.’
</p>
<p>
‘But you would hardly have heard of me,’ he said quickly. ‘My
time would be long before yours, ma’am, you see.’
</p>
<p>
This testimony to the youthfulness of his hostess had the effect of stopping
her cross-examination.
</p>
<p>
‘There is only one thing more wanted to make me happy,’ continued
the new-comer. ‘And that is a little baccy, which I am sorry to say I am
out of.’
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll fill your pipe,’ said the shepherd.
</p>
<p>
‘I must ask you to lend me a pipe likewise.’
</p>
<p>
‘A smoker, and no pipe about ‘ee?’
</p>
<p>
‘I have dropped it somewhere on the road.’
</p>
<p>
The shepherd filled and handed him a new clay pipe, saying, as he did so,
‘Hand me your baccy-box—I’ll fill that too, now I am about
it.’
</p>
<p>
The man went through the movement of searching his pockets.
</p>
<p>
‘Lost that too?’ said his entertainer, with some surprise.
</p>
<p>
‘I am afraid so,’ said the man with some confusion. ‘Give it
to me in a screw of paper.’ Lighting his pipe at the candle with a
suction that drew the whole flame into the bowl, he resettled himself in the
corner and bent his looks upon the faint steam from his damp legs, as if he
wished to say no more.
</p>
<p>
Meanwhile the general body of guests had been taking little notice of this
visitor by reason of an absorbing discussion in which they were engaged with
the band about a tune for the next dance. The matter being settled, they were
about to stand up when an interruption came in the shape of another knock at
the door.
</p>
<p>
At sound of the same the man in the chimney-corner took up the poker and began
stirring the brands as if doing it thoroughly were the one aim of his
existence; and a second time the shepherd said, ‘Walk in!’ In a
moment another man stood upon the straw-woven door-mat. He too was a stranger.
</p>
<p>
This individual was one of a type radically different from the first. There was
more of the commonplace in his manner, and a certain jovial cosmopolitanism sat
upon his features. He was several years older than the first arrival, his hair
being slightly frosted, his eyebrows bristly, and his whiskers cut back from
his cheeks. His face was rather full and flabby, and yet it was not altogether
a face without power. A few grog-blossoms marked the neighbourhood of his nose.
He flung back his long drab greatcoat, revealing that beneath it he wore a suit
of cinder-gray shade throughout, large heavy seals, of some metal or other that
would take a polish, dangling from his fob as his only personal ornament.
Shaking the water-drops from his low-crowned glazed hat, he said, ‘I must
ask for a few minutes’ shelter, comrades, or I shall be wetted to my skin
before I get to Casterbridge.’
</p>
<p>
‘Make yourself at home, master,’ said the shepherd, perhaps a
trifle less heartily than on the first occasion. Not that Fennel had the least
tinge of niggardliness in his composition; but the room was far from large,
spare chairs were not numerous, and damp companions were not altogether
desirable at close quarters for the women and girls in their bright-coloured
gowns.
</p>
<p>
However, the second comer, after taking off his greatcoat, and hanging his hat
on a nail in one of the ceiling-beams as if he had been specially invited to
put it there, advanced and sat down at the table. This had been pushed so
closely into the chimney-corner, to give all available room to the dancers,
that its inner edge grazed the elbow of the man who had ensconced himself by
the fire; and thus the two strangers were brought into close companionship.
They nodded to each other by way of breaking the ice of unacquaintance, and the
first stranger handed his neighbour the family mug—a huge vessel of brown
ware, having its upper edge worn away like a threshold by the rub of whole
generations of thirsty lips that had gone the way of all flesh, and bearing the
following inscription burnt upon its rotund side in yellow letters
</p>
<p class="center">
THERE IS NO FUN<br/>
UNTiLL i CUM.
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The other man, nothing loth, raised the mug to his lips, and drank on, and on,
and on—till a curious blueness overspread the countenance of the
shepherd’s wife, who had regarded with no little surprise the first
stranger’s free offer to the second of what did not belong to him to
dispense.
</p>
<p>
‘I knew it!’ said the toper to the shepherd with much satisfaction.
‘When I walked up your garden before coming in, and saw the hives all of
a row, I said to myself; “Where there’s bees there’s honey,
and where there’s honey there’s mead.” But mead of such a
truly comfortable sort as this I really didn’t expect to meet in my older
days.’ He took yet another pull at the mug, till it assumed an ominous
elevation.
</p>
<p>
‘Glad you enjoy it!’ said the shepherd warmly.
</p>
<p>
‘It is goodish mead,’ assented Mrs. Fennel, with an absence of
enthusiasm which seemed to say that it was possible to buy praise for
one’s cellar at too heavy a price. ‘It is trouble enough to
make—and really I hardly think we shall make any more. For honey sells
well, and we ourselves can make shift with a drop o’ small mead and
metheglin for common use from the comb-washings.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, but you’ll never have the heart!’ reproachfully cried the
stranger in cinder-gray, after taking up the mug a third time and setting it
down empty. ‘I love mead, when ’tis old like this, as I love to go
to church o’ Sundays, or to relieve the needy any day of the week.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ha, ha, ha!’ said the man in the chimney-corner, who, in spite of
the taciturnity induced by the pipe of tobacco, could not or would not refrain
from this slight testimony to his comrade’s humour.
</p>
<p>
Now the old mead of those days, brewed of the purest first-year or maiden
honey, four pounds to the gallon—with its due complement of white of
eggs, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, mace, rosemary, yeast, and processes of
working, bottling, and cellaring—tasted remarkably strong; but it did not
taste so strong as it actually was. Hence, presently, the stranger in
cinder-gray at the table, moved by its creeping influence, unbuttoned his
waistcoat, threw himself back in his chair, spread his legs, and made his
presence felt in various ways.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, well, as I say,’ he resumed, ‘I am going to
Casterbridge, and to Casterbridge I must go. I should have been almost there by
this time; but the rain drove me into your dwelling, and I’m not sorry
for it.’
</p>
<p>
‘You don’t live in Casterbridge?’ said the shepherd.
</p>
<p>
‘Not as yet; though I shortly mean to move there.’
</p>
<p>
‘Going to set up in trade, perhaps?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, no,’ said the shepherd’s wife. ‘It is easy to see
that the gentleman is rich, and don’t want to work at anything.’
</p>
<p>
The cinder-gray stranger paused, as if to consider whether he would accept that
definition of himself. He presently rejected it by answering, ‘Rich is
not quite the word for me, dame. I do work, and I must work. And even if I only
get to Casterbridge by midnight I must begin work there at eight to-morrow
morning. Yes, het or wet, blow or snow, famine or sword, my day’s work
to-morrow must be done.’
</p>
<p>
‘Poor man! Then, in spite o’ seeming, you be worse off than
we?’ replied the shepherd’s wife.
</p>
<p>
‘’Tis the nature of my trade, men and maidens. ’Tis the
nature of my trade more than my poverty . . . But really and truly I must up
and off, or I shan’t get a lodging in the town.’ However, the
speaker did not move, and directly added, ‘There’s time for one
more draught of friendship before I go; and I’d perform it at once if the
mug were not dry.’
</p>
<p>
‘Here’s a mug o’ small,’ said Mrs. Fennel.
‘Small, we call it, though to be sure ’tis only the first wash
o’ the combs.’
</p>
<p>
‘No,’ said the stranger disdainfully. ‘I won’t spoil
your first kindness by partaking o’ your second.’
</p>
<p>
‘Certainly not,’ broke in Fennel. ‘We don’t increase
and multiply every day, and I’ll fill the mug again.’ He went away
to the dark place under the stairs where the barrel stood. The shepherdess
followed him.
</p>
<p>
‘Why should you do this?’ she said reproachfully, as soon as they
were alone. ‘He’s emptied it once, though it held enough for ten
people; and now he’s not contented wi’ the small, but must needs
call for more o’ the strong! And a stranger unbeknown to any of us. For
my part, I don’t like the look o’ the man at all.’
</p>
<p>
‘But he’s in the house, my honey; and ’tis a wet night, and a
christening. Daze it, what’s a cup of mead more or less? There’ll
be plenty more next bee-burning.’
</p>
<p>
‘Very well—this time, then,’ she answered, looking wistfully
at the barrel. ‘But what is the man’s calling, and where is he one
of; that he should come in and join us like this?’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t know. I’ll ask him again.’
</p>
<p>
The catastrophe of having the mug drained dry at one pull by the stranger in
cinder-gray was effectually guarded against this time by Mrs. Fennel. She
poured out his allowance in a small cup, keeping the large one at a discreet
distance from him. When he had tossed off his portion the shepherd renewed his
inquiry about the stranger’s occupation.
</p>
<p>
The latter did not immediately reply, and the man in the chimney-corner, with
sudden demonstrativeness, said, ‘Anybody may know my
trade—I’m a wheelwright.’
</p>
<p>
‘A very good trade for these parts,’ said the shepherd.
</p>
<p>
‘And anybody may know mine—if they’ve the sense to find it
out,’ said the stranger in cinder-gray.
</p>
<p>
‘You may generally tell what a man is by his claws,’ observed the
hedge-carpenter, looking at his own hands. ‘My fingers be as full of
thorns as an old pin-cushion is of pins.’
</p>
<p>
The hands of the man in the chimney-corner instinctively sought the shade, and
he gazed into the fire as he resumed his pipe. The man at the table took up the
hedge-carpenter’s remark, and added smartly, ‘True; but the oddity
of my trade is that, instead of setting a mark upon me, it sets a mark upon my
customers.’
</p>
<p>
No observation being offered by anybody in elucidation of this enigma, the
shepherd’s wife once more called for a song. The same obstacles presented
themselves as at the former time—one had no voice, another had forgotten
the first verse. The stranger at the table, whose soul had now risen to a good
working temperature, relieved the difficulty by exclaiming that, to start the
company, he would sing himself. Thrusting one thumb into the arm-hole of his
waistcoat, he waved the other hand in the air, and, with an extemporizing gaze
at the shining sheep-crooks above the mantelpiece, began:—
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘O my trade it is the rarest one,<br/>
Simple shepherds all—<br/>
My trade is a sight to see;<br/>
For my customers I tie, and take them up on high,<br/>
And waft ’em to a far countree!’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The room was silent when he had finished the verse—with one exception,
that of the man in the chimney-corner, who, at the singer’s word,
‘Chorus! ‘joined him in a deep bass voice of musical relish—
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘And waft ’em to a far countree!’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Oliver Giles, John Pitcher the dairyman, the parish-clerk, the engaged man of
fifty, the row of young women against the wall, seemed lost in thought not of
the gayest kind. The shepherd looked meditatively on the ground, the
shepherdess gazed keenly at the singer, and with some suspicion; she was
doubting whether this stranger were merely singing an old song from
recollection, or was composing one there and then for the occasion. All were as
perplexed at the obscure revelation as the guests at Belshazzar’s Feast,
except the man in the chimney-corner, who quietly said, ‘Second verse,
stranger,’ and smoked on.
</p>
<p>
The singer thoroughly moistened himself from his lips inwards, and went on with
the next stanza as requested:-
</p>
<p class="poem">
My tools are but common ones,<br/>
Simple shepherds all—<br/>
My tools are no sight to see:<br/>
A little hempen string, and a post whereon to swing,<br/>
Are implements enough for me!’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Shepherd Fennel glanced round. There was no longer any doubt that the stranger
was answering his question rhythmically. The guests one and all started back
with suppressed exclamations. The young woman engaged to the man of fifty
fainted half-way, and would have proceeded, but finding him wanting in alacrity
for catching her she sat down trembling.
</p>
<p>
‘O, he’s the—!’ whispered the people in the background,
mentioning the name of an ominous public officer. ‘He’s come to do
it! ’Tis to be at Casterbridge jail to-morrow—the man for
sheep-stealing—the poor clock-maker we heard of; who used to live away at
Shottsford and had no work to do—Timothy Summers, whose family were
a-starving, and so he went out of Shottsford by the high-road, and took a sheep
in open daylight, defying the farmer and the farmer’s wife and the
farmer’s lad, and every man jack among ’em. He’ (and they
nodded towards the stranger of the deadly trade) ‘is come from up the
country to do it because there’s not enough to do in his own county-town,
and he’s got the place here now our own county man’s dead;
he’s going to live in the same cottage under the prison wall.’
</p>
<p>
The stranger in cinder-gray took no notice of this whispered string of
observations, but again wetted his lips. Seeing that his friend in the
chimney-corner was the only one who reciprocated his joviality in any way, he
held out his cup towards that appreciative comrade, who also held out his own.
They clinked together, the eyes of the rest of the room hanging upon the
singer’s actions. He parted his lips for the third verse; but at that
moment another knock was audible upon the door. This time the knock was faint
and hesitating.
</p>
<p>
The company seemed scared; the shepherd looked with consternation towards the
entrance, and it was with some effort that he resisted his alarmed wife’s
deprecatory glance, and uttered for the third time the welcoming words,
‘Walk in!’
</p>
<p>
The door was gently opened, and another man stood upon the mat. He, like those
who had preceded him, was a stranger. This time it was a short, small
personage, of fair complexion, and dressed in a decent suit of dark clothes.
</p>
<p>
‘Can you tell me the way to—?’ he began: when, gazing round
the room to observe the nature of the company amongst whom he had fallen, his
eyes lighted on the stranger in cinder-gray. It was just at the instant when
the latter, who had thrown his mind into his song with such a will that he
scarcely heeded the interruption, silenced all whispers and inquiries by
bursting into his third verse:-
</p>
<p class="poem">
To-morrow is my working day,<br/>
Simple shepherds all—<br/>
To-morrow is a working day for me:<br/>
For the farmer’s sheep is slain, and the lad who did it
ta’en,<br/>
And on his soul may God ha’ merc-y!’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The stranger in the chimney-corner, waving cups with the singer so heartily
that his mead splashed over on the hearth, repeated in his bass voice as
before:-
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘And on his soul may God ha’ merc-y!’
</p>
<p>
All this time the third stranger had been standing in the doorway. Finding now
that he did not come forward or go on speaking, the guests particularly
regarded him. They noticed to their surprise that he stood before them the
picture of abject terror—his knees trembling, his hand shaking so
violently that the door-latch by which he supported himself rattled audibly:
his white lips were parted, and his eyes fixed on the merry officer of justice
in the middle of the room. A moment more and he had turned, closed the door,
and fled.
</p>
<p>
‘What a man can it be?’ said the shepherd.
</p>
<p>
The rest, between the awfulness of their late discovery and the odd conduct of
this third visitor, looked as if they knew not what to think, and said nothing.
Instinctively they withdrew further and further from the grim gentleman in
their midst, whom some of them seemed to take for the Prince of Darkness
himself; till they formed a remote circle, an empty space of floor being left
between them and him—
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘ . . . circulus, cujus centrum diabolus.’
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The room was so silent—though there were more than twenty people in
it—that nothing could be heard but the patter of the rain against the
window-shutters, accompanied by the occasional hiss of a stray drop that fell
down the chimney into the fire, and the steady puffing of the man in the
corner, who had now resumed his pipe of long clay.
</p>
<p>
The stillness was unexpectedly broken. The distant sound of a gun reverberated
through the air—apparently from the direction of the county-town.
</p>
<p>
‘Be jiggered!’ cried the stranger who had sung the song, jumping
up.
</p>
<p>
‘What does that mean?’ asked several.
</p>
<p>
‘A prisoner escaped from the jail—that’s what it
means.’
</p>
<p>
All listened. The sound was repeated, and none of them spoke but the man in the
chimney-corner, who said quietly, ‘I’ve often been told that in
this county they fire a gun at such times; but I never heard it till
now.’
</p>
<p>
‘I wonder if it is <i>my</i> man?’ murmured the personage in
cinder-gray.
</p>
<p>
‘Surely it is!’ said the shepherd involuntarily. ‘And surely
we’ve zeed him! That little man who looked in at the door by now, and
quivered like a leaf when he zeed ye and heard your song!’
</p>
<p>
‘His teeth chattered, and the breath went out of his body,’ said
the dairyman.
</p>
<p>
‘And his heart seemed to sink within him like a stone,’ said Oliver
Giles.
</p>
<p>
‘And he bolted as if he’d been shot at,’ said the
hedge-carpenter.
</p>
<p>
‘True—his teeth chattered, and his heart seemed to sink; and he
bolted as if he’d been shot at,’ slowly summed up the man in the
chimney-corner.
</p>
<p>
‘I didn’t notice it,’ remarked the hangman.
</p>
<p>
‘We were all a-wondering what made him run off in such a fright,’
faltered one of the women against the wall, ‘and now ’tis
explained!’
</p>
<p>
The firing of the alarm-gun went on at intervals, low and sullenly, and their
suspicions became a certainty. The sinister gentleman in cinder-gray roused
himself. ‘Is there a constable here?’ he asked, in thick tones.
‘If so, let him step forward.’
</p>
<p>
The engaged man of fifty stepped quavering out from the wall, his betrothed
beginning to sob on the back of the chair.
</p>
<p>
‘You are a sworn constable?’
</p>
<p>
‘I be, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then pursue the criminal at once, with assistance, and bring him back
here. He can’t have gone far.’
</p>
<p>
‘I will, sir, I will—when I’ve got my staff. I’ll go
home and get it, and come sharp here, and start in a body.’
</p>
<p>
‘Staff!—never mind your staff; the man’ll be gone!’
</p>
<p>
‘But I can’t do nothing without my staff—can I, William, and
John, and Charles Jake? No; for there’s the king’s royal crown a
painted on en in yaller and gold, and the lion and the unicorn, so as when I
raise en up and hit my prisoner, ’tis made a lawful blow thereby. I
wouldn’t ‘tempt to take up a man without my staff—no, not I.
If I hadn’t the law to gie me courage, why, instead o’ my taking up
him he might take up me!’
</p>
<p>
‘Now, I’m a king’s man myself; and can give you authority
enough for this,’ said the formidable officer in gray. ‘Now then,
all of ye, be ready. Have ye any lanterns?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes—have ye any lanterns?—I demand it!’ said the
constable.
</p>
<p>
‘And the rest of you able-bodied—’
</p>
<p>
‘Able-bodied men—yes—the rest of ye!’ said the
constable.
</p>
<p>
‘Have you some good stout staves and pitch-forks—’
</p>
<p>
‘Staves and pitchforks—in the name o’ the law! And take
’em in yer hands and go in quest, and do as we in authority tell
ye!’
</p>
<p>
Thus aroused, the men prepared to give chase. The evidence was, indeed, though
circumstantial, so convincing, that but little argument was needed to show the
shepherd’s guests that after what they had seen it would look very much
like connivance if they did not instantly pursue the unhappy third stranger,
who could not as yet have gone more than a few hundred yards over such uneven
country.
</p>
<p>
A shepherd is always well provided with lanterns; and, lighting these hastily,
and with hurdle-staves in their hands, they poured out of the door, taking a
direction along the crest of the hill, away from the town, the rain having
fortunately a little abated.
</p>
<p>
Disturbed by the noise, or possibly by unpleasant dreams of her baptism, the
child who had been christened began to cry heart-brokenly in the room overhead.
These notes of grief came down through the chinks of the floor to the ears of
the women below, who jumped up one by one, and seemed glad of the excuse to
ascend and comfort the baby, for the incidents of the last half-hour greatly
oppressed them. Thus in the space of two or three minutes the room on the
ground-floor was deserted quite.
</p>
<p>
But it was not for long. Hardly had the sound of footsteps died away when a man
returned round the corner of the house from the direction the pursuers had
taken. Peeping in at the door, and seeing nobody there, he entered leisurely.
It was the stranger of the chimney-corner, who had gone out with the rest. The
motive of his return was shown by his helping himself to a cut piece of
skimmer-cake that lay on a ledge beside where he had sat, and which he had
apparently forgotten to take with him. He also poured out half a cup more mead
from the quantity that remained, ravenously eating and drinking these as he
stood. He had not finished when another figure came in just as
quietly—his friend in cinder-gray.
</p>
<p>
‘O—you here?’ said the latter, smiling. ‘I thought you
had gone to help in the capture.’ And this speaker also revealed the
object of his return by looking solicitously round for the fascinating mug of
old mead.
</p>
<p>
‘And I thought you had gone,’ said the other, continuing his
skimmer-cake with some effort.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, on second thoughts, I felt there were enough without me,’
said the first confidentially, ‘and such a night as it is, too. Besides,
’tis the business o’ the Government to take care of its
criminals—not mine.’
</p>
<p>
‘True; so it is. And I felt as you did, that there were enough without
me.’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t want to break my limbs running over the humps and hollows
of this wild country.’
</p>
<p>
‘Nor I neither, between you and me.’
</p>
<p>
‘These shepherd-people are used to it—simple-minded souls, you
know, stirred up to anything in a moment. They’ll have him ready for me
before the morning, and no trouble to me at all.’
</p>
<p>
‘They’ll have him, and we shall have saved ourselves all labour in
the matter.’
</p>
<p>
‘True, true. Well, my way is to Casterbridge; and ’tis as much as
my legs will do to take me that far. Going the same way?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, I am sorry to say! I have to get home over there’ (he nodded
indefinitely to the right), ‘and I feel as you do, that it is quite
enough for my legs to do before bedtime.’
</p>
<p>
The other had by this time finished the mead in the mug, after which, shaking
hands heartily at the door, and wishing each other well, they went their
several ways.
</p>
<p>
In the meantime the company of pursuers had reached the end of the
hog’s-back elevation which dominated this part of the down. They had
decided on no particular plan of action; and, finding that the man of the
baleful trade was no longer in their company, they seemed quite unable to form
any such plan now. They descended in all directions down the hill, and
straightway several of the party fell into the snare set by Nature for all
misguided midnight ramblers over this part of the cretaceous formation. The
‘lanchets,’ or flint slopes, which belted the escarpment at
intervals of a dozen yards, took the less cautious ones unawares, and losing
their footing on the rubbly steep they slid sharply downwards, the lanterns
rolling from their hands to the bottom, and there lying on their sides till the
horn was scorched through.
</p>
<p>
When they had again gathered themselves together, the shepherd, as the man who
knew the country best, took the lead, and guided them round these treacherous
inclines. The lanterns, which seemed rather to dazzle their eyes and warn the
fugitive than to assist them in the exploration, were extinguished, due silence
was observed; and in this more rational order they plunged into the vale. It
was a grassy, briery, moist defile, affording some shelter to any person who
had sought it; but the party perambulated it in vain, and ascended on the other
side. Here they wandered apart, and after an interval closed together again to
report progress.
</p>
<p>
At the second time of closing in they found themselves near a lonely ash, the
single tree on this part of the coomb, probably sown there by a passing bird
some fifty years before. And here, standing a little to one side of the trunk,
as motionless as the trunk itself; appeared the man they were in quest of; his
outline being well defined against the sky beyond. The band noiselessly drew up
and faced him.
</p>
<p>
‘Your money or your life!’ said the constable sternly to the still
figure.
</p>
<p>
‘No, no,’ whispered John Pitcher. ‘’Tisn’t our
side ought to say that. That’s the doctrine of vagabonds like him, and we
be on the side of the law.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, well,’ replied the constable impatiently; ‘I must say
something, mustn’t I? and if you had all the weight o’ this
undertaking upon your mind, perhaps you’d say the wrong thing
too!—Prisoner at the bar, surrender, in the name of the Father—the
Crown, I mane!’
</p>
<p>
The man under the tree seemed now to notice them for the first time, and,
giving them no opportunity whatever for exhibiting their courage, he strolled
slowly towards them. He was, indeed, the little man, the third stranger; but
his trepidation had in a great measure gone.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, travellers,’ he said, ‘did I hear ye speak to
me?’
</p>
<p>
‘You did: you’ve got to come and be our prisoner at once!’
said the constable. ‘We arrest ‘ee on the charge of not biding in
Casterbridge jail in a decent proper manner to be hung to-morrow morning.
Neighbours, do your duty, and seize the culpet!’
</p>
<p>
On hearing the charge, the man seemed enlightened, and, saying not another
word, resigned himself with preternatural civility to the search-party, who,
with their staves in their hands, surrounded him on all sides, and marched him
back towards the shepherd’s cottage.
</p>
<p>
It was eleven o’clock by the time they arrived. The light shining from
the open door, a sound of men’s voices within, proclaimed to them as they
approached the house that some new events had arisen in their absence. On
entering they discovered the shepherd’s living room to be invaded by two
officers from Casterbridge jail, and a well-known magistrate who lived at the
nearest country-seat, intelligence of the escape having become generally
circulated.
</p>
<p>
‘Gentlemen,’ said the constable, ‘I have brought back your
man—not without risk and danger; but every one must do his duty! He is
inside this circle of able-bodied persons, who have lent me useful aid,
considering their ignorance of Crown work. Men, bring forward your
prisoner!’ And the third stranger was led to the light.
</p>
<p>
‘Who is this?’ said one of the officials.
</p>
<p>
‘The man,’ said the constable.
</p>
<p>
‘Certainly not,’ said the turnkey; and the first corroborated his
statement.
</p>
<p>
‘But how can it be otherwise?’ asked the constable. ‘Or why
was he so terrified at sight o’ the singing instrument of the law who sat
there?’ Here he related the strange behaviour of the third stranger on
entering the house during the hangman’s song.
</p>
<p>
‘Can’t understand it,’ said the officer coolly. ‘All I
know is that it is not the condemned man. He’s quite a different
character from this one; a gauntish fellow, with dark hair and eyes, rather
good-looking, and with a musical bass voice that if you heard it once
you’d never mistake as long as you lived.’
</p>
<p>
‘Why, souls—’twas the man in the chimney-corner!’
</p>
<p>
‘Hey—what?’ said the magistrate, coming forward after
inquiring particulars from the shepherd in the background. ‘Haven’t
you got the man after all?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, sir,’ said the constable, ‘he’s the man we were
in search of, that’s true; and yet he’s not the man we were in
search of. For the man we were in search of was not the man we wanted, sir, if
you understand my everyday way; for ’twas the man in the
chimney-corner!’
</p>
<p>
‘A pretty kettle of fish altogether!’ said the magistrate.
‘You had better start for the other man at once.’
</p>
<p>
The prisoner now spoke for the first time. The mention of the man in the
chimney-corner seemed to have moved him as nothing else could do.
‘Sir,’ he said, stepping forward to the magistrate, ‘take no
more trouble about me. The time is come when I may as well speak. I have done
nothing; my crime is that the condemned man is my brother. Early this afternoon
I left home at Shottsford to tramp it all the way to Casterbridge jail to bid
him farewell. I was benighted, and called here to rest and ask the way. When I
opened the door I saw before me the very man, my brother, that I thought to see
in the condemned cell at Casterbridge. He was in this chimney-corner; and
jammed close to him, so that he could not have got out if he had tried, was the
executioner who’d come to take his life, singing a song about it and not
knowing that it was his victim who was close by, joining in to save
appearances. My brother looked a glance of agony at me, and I knew he meant,
“Don’t reveal what you see; my life depends on it.” I was so
terror-struck that I could hardly stand, and, not knowing what I did, I turned
and hurried away.’
</p>
<p>
The narrator’s manner and tone had the stamp of truth, and his story made
a great impression on all around. ‘And do you know where your brother is
at the present time?’ asked the magistrate.
</p>
<p>
‘I do not. I have never seen him since I closed this door.’
</p>
<p>
‘I can testify to that, for we’ve been between ye ever
since,’ said the constable.
</p>
<p>
‘Where does he think to fly to?—what is his occupation?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s a watch-and-clock-maker, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘’A said ’a was a wheelwright—a wicked rogue,’
said the constable.
</p>
<p>
‘The wheels of clocks and watches he meant, no doubt,’ said
Shepherd Fennel. ‘I thought his hands were palish for’s
trade.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, it appears to me that nothing can be gained by retaining this poor
man in custody,’ said the magistrate; ‘your business lies with the
other, unquestionably.’
</p>
<p>
And so the little man was released off-hand; but he looked nothing the less sad
on that account, it being beyond the power of magistrate or constable to raze
out the written troubles in his brain, for they concerned another whom he
regarded with more solicitude than himself. When this was done, and the man had
gone his way, the night was found to be so far advanced that it was deemed
useless to renew the search before the next morning.
</p>
<p>
Next day, accordingly, the quest for the clever sheep-stealer became general
and keen, to all appearance at least. But the intended punishment was cruelly
disproportioned to the transgression, and the sympathy of a great many
country-folk in that district was strongly on the side of the fugitive.
Moreover, his marvellous coolness and daring in hob-and-nobbing with the
hangman, under the unprecedented circumstances of the shepherd’s party,
won their admiration. So that it may be questioned if all those who ostensibly
made themselves so busy in exploring woods and fields and lanes were quite so
thorough when it came to the private examination of their own lofts and
outhouses. Stories were afloat of a mysterious figure being occasionally seen
in some old overgrown trackway or other, remote from turnpike roads; but when a
search was instituted in any of these suspected quarters nobody was found. Thus
the days and weeks passed without tidings.
</p>
<p>
In brief; the bass-voiced man of the chimney-corner was never recaptured. Some
said that he went across the sea, others that he did not, but buried himself in
the depths of a populous city. At any rate, the gentleman in cinder-gray never
did his morning’s work at Casterbridge, nor met anywhere at all, for
business purposes, the genial comrade with whom he had passed an hour of
relaxation in the lonely house on the coomb.
</p>
<p>
The grass has long been green on the graves of Shepherd Fennel and his frugal
wife; the guests who made up the christening party have mainly followed their
entertainers to the tomb; the baby in whose honour they all had met is a matron
in the sere and yellow leaf. But the arrival of the three strangers at the
shepherd’s that night, and the details connected therewith, is a story as
well known as ever in the country about Higher Crowstairs.
</p>
<p class="p2">
March 1883.
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap04"/>THE WITHERED ARM</h2>
<h3>CHAPTER I—A LORN MILKMAID</h3>
<p>
It was an eighty-cow dairy, and the troop of milkers, regular and
supernumerary, were all at work; for, though the time of year was as yet but
early April, the feed lay entirely in water-meadows, and the cows were
‘in full pail.’ The hour was about six in the evening, and
three-fourths of the large, red, rectangular animals having been finished off,
there was opportunity for a little conversation.
</p>
<p>
‘He do bring home his bride to-morrow, I hear. They’ve come as far
as Anglebury to-day.’
</p>
<p>
The voice seemed to proceed from the belly of the cow called Cherry, but the
speaker was a milking-woman, whose face was buried in the flank of that
motionless beast.
</p>
<p>
‘Hav’ anybody seen her?’ said another.
</p>
<p>
There was a negative response from the first. ‘Though they say
she’s a rosy-cheeked, tisty-tosty little body enough,’ she added;
and as the milkmaid spoke she turned her face so that she could glance past her
cow’s tail to the other side of the barton, where a thin, fading woman of
thirty milked somewhat apart from the rest.
</p>
<p>
‘Years younger than he, they say,’ continued the second, with also
a glance of reflectiveness in the same direction.
</p>
<p>
‘How old do you call him, then?’
</p>
<p>
‘Thirty or so.’
</p>
<p>
‘More like forty,’ broke in an old milkman near, in a long white
pinafore or ‘wropper,’ and with the brim of his hat tied down, so
that he looked like a woman. ‘’A was born before our Great Weir was
builded, and I hadn’t man’s wages when I laved water there.’
</p>
<p>
The discussion waxed so warm that the purr of the milk-streams became jerky,
till a voice from another cow’s belly cried with authority, ‘Now
then, what the Turk do it matter to us about Farmer Lodge’s age, or
Farmer Lodge’s new mis’ess? I shall have to pay him nine pound a
year for the rent of every one of these milchers, whatever his age or hers. Get
on with your work, or ’twill be dark afore we have done. The evening is
pinking in a’ready.’ This speaker was the dairyman himself; by whom
the milkmaids and men were employed.
</p>
<p>
Nothing more was said publicly about Farmer Lodge’s wedding, but the
first woman murmured under her cow to her next neighbour, ‘’Tis
hard for <i>she</i>,’ signifying the thin worn milkmaid aforesaid.
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ said the second. ‘He ha’n’t spoke to
Rhoda Brook for years.’
</p>
<p>
When the milking was done they washed their pails and hung them on a
many-forked stand made of the peeled limb of an oak-tree, set upright in the
earth, and resembling a colossal antlered horn. The majority then dispersed in
various directions homeward. The thin woman who had not spoken was joined by a
boy of twelve or thereabout, and the twain went away up the field also.
</p>
<p>
Their course lay apart from that of the others, to a lonely spot high above the
water-meads, and not far from the border of Egdon Heath, whose dark countenance
was visible in the distance as they drew nigh to their home.
</p>
<p>
‘They’ve just been saying down in barton that your father brings
his young wife home from Anglebury to-morrow,’ the woman observed.
‘I shall want to send you for a few things to market, and you’ll be
pretty sure to meet ’em.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, mother,’ said the boy. ‘Is father married then?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes . . . You can give her a look, and tell me what’s she’s
like, if you do see her.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, mother.’
</p>
<p>
‘If she’s dark or fair, and if she’s tall—as tall as I.
And if she seems like a woman who has ever worked for a living, or one that has
been always well off, and has never done anything, and shows marks of the lady
on her, as I expect she do.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes.’
</p>
<p>
They crept up the hill in the twilight, and entered the cottage. It was built
of mud-walls, the surface of which had been washed by many rains into channels
and depressions that left none of the original flat face visible; while here
and there in the thatch above a rafter showed like a bone protruding through
the skin.
</p>
<p>
She was kneeling down in the chimney-corner, before two pieces of turf laid
together with the heather inwards, blowing at the red-hot ashes with her breath
till the turves flamed. The radiance lit her pale cheek, and made her dark
eyes, that had once been handsome, seem handsome anew. ‘Yes,’ she
resumed, ‘see if she is dark or fair, and if you can, notice if her hands
be white; if not, see if they look as though she had ever done housework, or
are milker’s hands like mine.’
</p>
<p>
The boy again promised, inattentively this time, his mother not observing that
he was cutting a notch with his pocket-knife in the beech-backed chair.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II—THE YOUNG WIFE</h3>
<p>
The road from Anglebury to Holmstoke is in general level; but there is one
place where a sharp ascent breaks its monotony. Farmers homeward-bound from the
former market-town, who trot all the rest of the way, walk their horses up this
short incline.
</p>
<p>
The next evening, while the sun was yet bright, a handsome new gig, with a
lemon-coloured body and red wheels, was spinning westward along the level
highway at the heels of a powerful mare. The driver was a yeoman in the prime
of life, cleanly shaven like an actor, his face being toned to that
bluish-vermilion hue which so often graces a thriving farmer’s features
when returning home after successful dealings in the town. Beside him sat a
woman, many years his junior—almost, indeed, a girl. Her face too was
fresh in colour, but it was of a totally different quality—soft and
evanescent, like the light under a heap of rose-petals.
</p>
<p>
Few people travelled this way, for it was not a main road; and the long white
riband of gravel that stretched before them was empty, save of one small
scarce-moving speck, which presently resolved itself into the figure of boy,
who was creeping on at a snail’s pace, and continually looking behind
him—the heavy bundle he carried being some excuse for, if not the reason
of, his dilatoriness. When the bouncing gig-party slowed at the bottom of the
incline above mentioned, the pedestrian was only a few yards in front.
Supporting the large bundle by putting one hand on his hip, he turned and
looked straight at the farmer’s wife as though he would read her through
and through, pacing along abreast of the horse.
</p>
<p>
The low sun was full in her face, rendering every feature, shade, and contour
distinct, from the curve of her little nostril to the colour of her eyes. The
farmer, though he seemed annoyed at the boy’s persistent presence, did
not order him to get out of the way; and thus the lad preceded them, his hard
gaze never leaving her, till they reached the top of the ascent, when the
farmer trotted on with relief in his lineaments—having taken no outward
notice of the boy whatever.
</p>
<p>
‘How that poor lad stared at me!’ said the young wife.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, dear; I saw that he did.’
</p>
<p>
‘He is one of the village, I suppose?’
</p>
<p>
‘One of the neighbourhood. I think he lives with his mother a mile or two
off.’
</p>
<p>
‘He knows who we are, no doubt?’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes. You must expect to be stared at just at first, my pretty
Gertrude.’
</p>
<p>
‘I do,—though I think the poor boy may have looked at us in the
hope we might relieve him of his heavy load, rather than from curiosity.’
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ said her husband off-handedly. ‘These country lads
will carry a hundredweight once they get it on their backs; besides his pack
had more size than weight in it. Now, then, another mile and I shall be able to
show you our house in the distance—if it is not too dark before we get
there.’ The wheels spun round, and particles flew from their periphery as
before, till a white house of ample dimensions revealed itself, with
farm-buildings and ricks at the back.
</p>
<p>
Meanwhile the boy had quickened his pace, and turning up a by-lane some mile
and half short of the white farmstead, ascended towards the leaner pastures,
and so on to the cottage of his mother.
</p>
<p>
She had reached home after her day’s milking at the outlying dairy, and
was washing cabbage at the doorway in the declining light. ‘Hold up the
net a moment,’ she said, without preface, as the boy came up.
</p>
<p>
He flung down his bundle, held the edge of the cabbage-net, and as she filled
its meshes with the dripping leaves she went on, ‘Well, did you see
her?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; quite plain.’
</p>
<p>
‘Is she ladylike?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; and more. A lady complete.’
</p>
<p>
‘Is she young?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, she’s growed up, and her ways be quite a
woman’s.’
</p>
<p>
‘Of course. What colour is her hair and face?’
</p>
<p>
‘Her hair is lightish, and her face as comely as a live
doll’s.’
</p>
<p>
‘Her eyes, then, are not dark like mine?’
</p>
<p>
‘No—of a bluish turn, and her mouth is very nice and red; and when
she smiles, her teeth show white.’
</p>
<p>
‘Is she tall?’ said the woman sharply.
</p>
<p>
‘I couldn’t see. She was sitting down.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then do you go to Holmstoke church to-morrow morning: she’s sure
to be there. Go early and notice her walking in, and come home and tell me if
she’s taller than I.’
</p>
<p>
‘Very well, mother. But why don’t you go and see for
yourself?’
</p>
<p>
<i>‘I</i> go to see her! I wouldn’t look up at her if she were to
pass my window this instant. She was with Mr. Lodge, of course. What did he say
or do?’
</p>
<p>
‘Just the same as usual.’
</p>
<p>
‘Took no notice of you?’
</p>
<p>
‘None.’
</p>
<p>
Next day the mother put a clean shirt on the boy, and started him off for
Holmstoke church. He reached the ancient little pile when the door was just
being opened, and he was the first to enter. Taking his seat by the font, he
watched all the parishioners file in. The well-to-do Farmer Lodge came nearly
last; and his young wife, who accompanied him, walked up the aisle with the
shyness natural to a modest woman who had appeared thus for the first time. As
all other eyes were fixed upon her, the youth’s stare was not noticed
now.
</p>
<p>
When he reached home his mother said, ‘Well?’ before he had entered
the room.
</p>
<p>
‘She is not tall. She is rather short,’ he replied.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah!’ said his mother, with satisfaction.
</p>
<p>
‘But she’s very pretty—very. In fact, she’s
lovely.’
</p>
<p>
The youthful freshness of the yeoman’s wife had evidently made an
impression even on the somewhat hard nature of the boy.
</p>
<p>
‘That’s all I want to hear,’ said his mother quickly.
‘Now, spread the table-cloth. The hare you caught is very tender; but
mind that nobody catches you.—You’ve never told me what sort of
hands she had.’
</p>
<p>
‘I have never seen ’em. She never took off her gloves.’
</p>
<p>
‘What did she wear this morning?’
</p>
<p>
‘A white bonnet and a silver-coloured gownd. It whewed and whistled so
loud when it rubbed against the pews that the lady coloured up more than ever
for very shame at the noise, and pulled it in to keep it from touching; but
when she pushed into her seat, it whewed more than ever. Mr. Lodge, he seemed
pleased, and his waistcoat stuck out, and his great golden seals hung like a
lord’s; but she seemed to wish her noisy gownd anywhere but on
her.’
</p>
<p>
‘Not she! However, that will do now.’
</p>
<p>
These descriptions of the newly-married couple were continued from time to time
by the boy at his mother’s request, after any chance encounter he had had
with them. But Rhoda Brook, though she might easily have seen young Mrs. Lodge
for herself by walking a couple of miles, would never attempt an excursion
towards the quarter where the farmhouse lay. Neither did she, at the daily
milking in the dairyman’s yard on Lodge’s outlying second farm,
ever speak on the subject of the recent marriage. The dairyman, who rented the
cows of Lodge, and knew perfectly the tall milkmaid’s history, with manly
kindliness always kept the gossip in the cow-barton from annoying Rhoda. But
the atmosphere thereabout was full of the subject during the first days of Mrs.
Lodge’s arrival; and from her boy’s description and the casual
words of the other milkers, Rhoda Brook could raise a mental image of the
unconscious Mrs Lodge that was realistic as a photograph.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER III—A VISION</h3>
<p>
One night, two or three weeks after the bridal return, when the boy was gone to
bed, Rhoda sat a long time over the turf ashes that she had raked out in front
of her to extinguish them. She contemplated so intently the new wife, as
presented to her in her mind’s eye over the embers, that she forgot the
lapse of time. At last, wearied with her day’s work, she too retired.
</p>
<p>
But the figure which had occupied her so much during this and the previous days
was not to be banished at night. For the first time Gertrude Lodge visited the
supplanted woman in her dreams. Rhoda Brook dreamed—since her assertion
that she really saw, before falling asleep, was not to be believed—that
the young wife, in the pale silk dress and white bonnet, but with features
shockingly distorted, and wrinkled as by age, was sitting upon her chest as she
lay. The pressure of Mrs. Lodge’s person grew heavier; the blue eyes
peered cruelly into her face; and then the figure thrust forward its left hand
mockingly, so as to make the wedding-ring it wore glitter in Rhoda’s
eyes. Maddened mentally, and nearly suffocated by pressure, the sleeper
struggled; the incubus, still regarding her, withdrew to the foot of the bed,
only, however, to come forward by degrees, resume her seat, and flash her left
hand as before.
</p>
<p>
Gasping for breath, Rhoda, in a last desperate effort, swung out her right
hand, seized the confronting spectre by its obtrusive left arm, and whirled it
backward to the floor, starting up herself as she did so with a low cry.
</p>
<p>
‘O, merciful heaven!’ she cried, sitting on the edge of the bed in
a cold sweat; ‘that was not a dream—she was here!’
</p>
<p>
She could feel her antagonist’s arm within her grasp even now—the
very flesh and bone of it, as it seemed. She looked on the floor whither she
had whirled the spectre, but there was nothing to be seen.
</p>
<p>
Rhoda Brook slept no more that night, and when she went milking at the next
dawn they noticed how pale and haggard she looked. The milk that she drew
quivered into the pail; her hand had not calmed even yet, and still retained
the feel of the arm. She came home to breakfast as wearily as if it had been
suppertime.
</p>
<p>
‘What was that noise in your chimmer, mother, last night?’ said her
son. ‘You fell off the bed, surely?’
</p>
<p>
‘Did you hear anything fall? At what time?’
</p>
<p>
‘Just when the clock struck two.’
</p>
<p>
She could not explain, and when the meal was done went silently about her
household work, the boy assisting her, for he hated going afield on the farms,
and she indulged his reluctance. Between eleven and twelve the garden-gate
clicked, and she lifted her eyes to the window. At the bottom of the garden,
within the gate, stood the woman of her vision. Rhoda seemed transfixed.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, she said she would come!’ exclaimed the boy, also observing
her.
</p>
<p>
‘Said so—when? How does she know us?’
</p>
<p>
‘I have seen and spoken to her. I talked to her yesterday.’
</p>
<p>
‘I told you,’ said the mother, flushing indignantly, ‘never
to speak to anybody in that house, or go near the place.’
</p>
<p>
‘I did not speak to her till she spoke to me. And I did not go near the
place. I met her in the road.’
</p>
<p>
‘What did you tell her?’
</p>
<p>
‘Nothing. She said, “Are you the poor boy who had to bring the
heavy load from market?” And she looked at my boots, and said they would
not keep my feet dry if it came on wet, because they were so cracked. I told
her I lived with my mother, and we had enough to do to keep ourselves, and
that’s how it was; and she said then, “I’ll come and bring
you some better boots, and see your mother.” She gives away things to
other folks in the meads besides us.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Lodge was by this time close to the door—not in her silk, as Rhoda
had seen her in the bed-chamber, but in a morning hat, and gown of common light
material, which became her better than silk. On her arm she carried a basket.
</p>
<p>
The impression remaining from the night’s experience was still strong.
Brook had almost expected to see the wrinkles, the scorn, and the cruelty on
her visitor’s face.
</p>
<p>
She would have escaped an interview, had escape been possible. There was,
however, no backdoor to the cottage, and in an instant the boy had lifted the
latch to Mrs. Lodge’s gentle knock.
</p>
<p>
‘I see I have come to the right house,’ said she, glancing at the
lad, and smiling. ‘But I was not sure till you opened the door.’
</p>
<p>
The figure and action were those of the phantom; but her voice was so
indescribably sweet, her glance so winning, her smile so tender, so unlike that
of Rhoda’s midnight visitant, that the latter could hardly believe the
evidence of her senses. She was truly glad that she had not hidden away in
sheer aversion, as she had been inclined to do. In her basket Mrs. Lodge
brought the pair of boots that she had promised to the boy, and other useful
articles.
</p>
<p>
At these proofs of a kindly feeling towards her and hers Rhoda’s heart
reproached her bitterly. This innocent young thing should have her blessing and
not her curse. When she left them a light seemed gone from the dwelling. Two
days later she came again to know if the boots fitted; and less than a
fortnight after that paid Rhoda another call. On this occasion the boy was
absent.
</p>
<p>
‘I walk a good deal,’ said Mrs. Lodge, ‘and your house is the
nearest outside our own parish. I hope you are well. You don’t look quite
well.’
</p>
<p>
Rhoda said she was well enough; and, indeed, though the paler of the two, there
was more of the strength that endures in her well-defined features and large
frame, than in the soft-cheeked young woman before her. The conversation became
quite confidential as regarded their powers and weaknesses; and when Mrs. Lodge
was leaving, Rhoda said, ‘I hope you will find this air agree with you,
ma’am, and not suffer from the damp of the water-meads.’
</p>
<p>
The younger one replied that there was not much doubt of it, her general health
being usually good. ‘Though, now you remind me,’ she added,
‘I have one little ailment which puzzles me. It is nothing serious, but I
cannot make it out.’
</p>
<p>
She uncovered her left hand and arm; and their outline confronted Rhoda’s
gaze as the exact original of the limb she had beheld and seized in her dream.
Upon the pink round surface of the arm were faint marks of an unhealthy colour,
as if produced by a rough grasp. Rhoda’s eyes became riveted on the
discolorations; she fancied that she discerned in them the shape of her own
four fingers.
</p>
<p>
‘How did it happen?’ she said mechanically.
</p>
<p>
‘I cannot tell,’ replied Mrs. Lodge, shaking her head. ‘One
night when I was sound asleep, dreaming I was away in some strange place, a
pain suddenly shot into my arm there, and was so keen as to awaken me. I must
have struck it in the daytime, I suppose, though I don’t remember doing
so.’ She added, laughing, ‘I tell my dear husband that it looks
just as if he had flown into a rage and struck me there. O, I daresay it will
soon disappear.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ha, ha! Yes . . . On what night did it come?’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Lodge considered, and said it would be a fortnight ago on the morrow.
‘When I awoke I could not remember where I was,’ she added,
’till the clock striking two reminded me.’
</p>
<p>
She had named the night and the hour of Rhoda’s spectral encounter, and
Brook felt like a guilty thing. The artless disclosure startled her; she did
not reason on the freaks of coincidence; and all the scenery of that ghastly
night returned with double vividness to her mind.
</p>
<p>
‘O, can it be,’ she said to herself, when her visitor had departed,
‘that I exercise a malignant power over people against my own
will?’ She knew that she had been slily called a witch since her fall;
but never having understood why that particular stigma had been attached to
her, it had passed disregarded. Could this be the explanation, and had such
things as this ever happened before?
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV—A SUGGESTION</h3>
<p>
The summer drew on, and Rhoda Brook almost dreaded to meet Mrs. Lodge again,
notwithstanding that her feeling for the young wife amounted well-nigh to
affection. Something in her own individuality seemed to convict Rhoda of crime.
Yet a fatality sometimes would direct the steps of the latter to the outskirts
of Holmstoke whenever she left her house for any other purpose than her daily
work; and hence it happened that their next encounter was out of doors. Rhoda
could not avoid the subject which had so mystified her, and after the first few
words she stammered, ‘I hope your—arm is well again,
ma’am?’ She had perceived with consternation that Gertrude Lodge
carried her left arm stiffly.
</p>
<p>
‘No; it is not quite well. Indeed it is no better at all; it is rather
worse. It pains me dreadfully sometimes.’
</p>
<p>
‘Perhaps you had better go to a doctor, ma’am.’
</p>
<p>
She replied that she had already seen a doctor. Her husband had insisted upon
her going to one. But the surgeon had not seemed to understand the afflicted
limb at all; he had told her to bathe it in hot water, and she had bathed it,
but the treatment had done no good.
</p>
<p>
‘Will you let me see it?’ said the milkwoman.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Lodge pushed up her sleeve and disclosed the place, which was a few inches
above the wrist. As soon as Rhoda Brook saw it, she could hardly preserve her
composure. There was nothing of the nature of a wound, but the arm at that
point had a shrivelled look, and the outline of the four fingers appeared more
distinct than at the former time. Moreover, she fancied that they were
imprinted in precisely the relative position of her clutch upon the arm in the
trance; the first finger towards Gertrude’s wrist, and the fourth towards
her elbow.
</p>
<p>
What the impress resembled seemed to have struck Gertrude herself since their
last meeting. ‘It looks almost like finger-marks,’ she said; adding
with a faint laugh, ‘my husband says it is as if some witch, or the devil
himself, had taken hold of me there, and blasted the flesh.’
</p>
<p>
Rhoda shivered. ‘That’s fancy,’ she said hurriedly. ‘I
wouldn’t mind it, if I were you.’
</p>
<p>
‘I shouldn’t so much mind it,’ said the younger, with
hesitation, ‘if—if I hadn’t a notion that it makes my
husband—dislike me—no, love me less. Men think so much of personal
appearance.’
</p>
<p>
‘Some do—he for one.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; and he was very proud of mine, at first.’
</p>
<p>
‘Keep your arm covered from his sight.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah—he knows the disfigurement is there!’ She tried to hide
the tears that filled her eyes.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, ma’am, I earnestly hope it will go away soon.’
</p>
<p>
And so the milkwoman’s mind was chained anew to the subject by a horrid
sort of spell as she returned home. The sense of having been guilty of an act
of malignity increased, affect as she might to ridicule her superstition. In
her secret heart Rhoda did not altogether object to a slight diminution of her
successor’s beauty, by whatever means it had come about; but she did not
wish to inflict upon her physical pain. For though this pretty young woman had
rendered impossible any reparation which Lodge might have made Rhoda for his
past conduct, everything like resentment at the unconscious usurpation had
quite passed away from the elder’s mind.
</p>
<p>
If the sweet and kindly Gertrude Lodge only knew of the scene in the
bed-chamber, what would she think? Not to inform her of it seemed treachery in
the presence of her friendliness; but tell she could not of her own
accord—neither could she devise a remedy.
</p>
<p>
She mused upon the matter the greater part of the night; and the next day,
after the morning milking, set out to obtain another glimpse of Gertrude Lodge
if she could, being held to her by a gruesome fascination. By watching the
house from a distance the milkmaid was presently able to discern the
farmer’s wife in a ride she was taking alone—probably to join her
husband in some distant field. Mrs. Lodge perceived her, and cantered in her
direction.
</p>
<p>
‘Good morning, Rhoda!’ Gertrude said, when she had come up.
‘I was going to call.’
</p>
<p>
Rhoda noticed that Mrs. Lodge held the reins with some difficulty.
</p>
<p>
‘I hope—the bad arm,’ said Rhoda.
</p>
<p>
‘They tell me there is possibly one way by which I might be able to find
out the cause, and so perhaps the cure, of it,’ replied the other
anxiously. ‘It is by going to some clever man over in Egdon Heath. They
did not know if he was still alive—and I cannot remember his name at this
moment; but they said that you knew more of his movements than anybody else
hereabout, and could tell me if he were still to be consulted. Dear
me—what was his name? But you know.’
</p>
<p>
‘Not Conjuror Trendle?’ said her thin companion, turning pale.
</p>
<p>
‘Trendle—yes. Is he alive?’
</p>
<p>
‘I believe so,’ said Rhoda, with reluctance.
</p>
<p>
‘Why do you call him conjuror?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well—they say—they used to say he was a—he had powers
other folks have not.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, how could my people be so superstitious as to recommend a man of that
sort! I thought they meant some medical man. I shall think no more of
him.’
</p>
<p>
Rhoda looked relieved, and Mrs. Lodge rode on. The milkwoman had inwardly seen,
from the moment she heard of her having been mentioned as a reference for this
man, that there must exist a sarcastic feeling among the work-folk that a
sorceress would know the whereabouts of the exorcist. They suspected her, then.
A short time ago this would have given no concern to a woman of her
common-sense. But she had a haunting reason to be superstitious now; and she
had been seized with sudden dread that this Conjuror Trendle might name her as
the malignant influence which was blasting the fair person of Gertrude, and so
lead her friend to hate her for ever, and to treat her as some fiend in human
shape.
</p>
<p>
But all was not over. Two days after, a shadow intruded into the window-pattern
thrown on Rhoda Brook’s floor by the afternoon sun. The woman opened the
door at once, almost breathlessly.
</p>
<p>
‘Are you alone?’ said Gertrude. She seemed to be no less harassed
and anxious than Brook herself.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said Rhoda.
</p>
<p>
‘The place on my arm seems worse, and troubles me!’ the young
farmer’s wife went on. ‘It is so mysterious! I do hope it will not
be an incurable wound. I have again been thinking of what they said about
Conjuror Trendle. I don’t really believe in such men, but I should not
mind just visiting him, from curiosity—though on no account must my
husband know. Is it far to where he lives?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes—five miles,’ said Rhoda backwardly. ‘In the heart
of Egdon.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I should have to walk. Could not you go with me to show me the
way—say to-morrow afternoon?’
</p>
<p>
‘O, not I—that is,’ the milkwoman murmured, with a start of
dismay. Again the dread seized her that something to do with her fierce act in
the dream might be revealed, and her character in the eyes of the most useful
friend she had ever had be ruined irretrievably.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Lodge urged, and Rhoda finally assented, though with much misgiving. Sad
as the journey would be to her, she could not conscientiously stand in the way
of a possible remedy for her patron’s strange affliction. It was agreed
that, to escape suspicion of their mystic intent, they should meet at the edge
of the heath at the corner of a plantation which was visible from the spot
where they now stood.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER V—CONJUROR TRENDLE</h3>
<p>
By the next afternoon Rhoda would have done anything to escape this inquiry.
But she had promised to go. Moreover, there was a horrid fascination at times
in becoming instrumental in throwing such possible light on her own character
as would reveal her to be something greater in the occult world than she had
ever herself suspected.
</p>
<p>
She started just before the time of day mentioned between them, and
half-an-hour’s brisk walking brought her to the south-eastern extension
of the Egdon tract of country, where the fir plantation was. A slight figure,
cloaked and veiled, was already there. Rhoda recognized, almost with a shudder,
that Mrs. Lodge bore her left arm in a sling.
</p>
<p>
They hardly spoke to each other, and immediately set out on their climb into
the interior of this solemn country, which stood high above the rich alluvial
soil they had left half-an-hour before. It was a long walk; thick clouds made
the atmosphere dark, though it was as yet only early afternoon; and the wind
howled dismally over the hills of the heath—not improbably the same heath
which had witnessed the agony of the Wessex King Ina, presented to after-ages
as Lear. Gertrude Lodge talked most, Rhoda replying with monosyllabic
preoccupation. She had a strange dislike to walking on the side of her
companion where hung the afflicted arm, moving round to the other when
inadvertently near it. Much heather had been brushed by their feet when they
descended upon a cart-track, beside which stood the house of the man they
sought.
</p>
<p>
He did not profess his remedial practices openly, or care anything about their
continuance, his direct interests being those of a dealer in furze, turf,
‘sharp sand,’ and other local products. Indeed, he affected not to
believe largely in his own powers, and when warts that had been shown him for
cure miraculously disappeared—which it must be owned they infallibly
did—he would say lightly, ‘O, I only drink a glass of grog upon
’em—perhaps it’s all chance,’ and immediately turn the
subject.
</p>
<p>
He was at home when they arrived, having in fact seen them descending into his
valley. He was a gray-bearded man, with a reddish face, and he looked
singularly at Rhoda the first moment he beheld her. Mrs. Lodge told him her
errand; and then with words of self-disparagement he examined her arm.
</p>
<p>
‘Medicine can’t cure it,’ he said promptly. ‘’Tis
the work of an enemy.’
</p>
<p>
Rhoda shrank into herself, and drew back.
</p>
<p>
‘An enemy? What enemy?’ asked Mrs. Lodge.
</p>
<p>
He shook his head. ‘That’s best known to yourself,’ he said.
‘If you like, I can show the person to you, though I shall not myself
know who it is. I can do no more; and don’t wish to do that.’
</p>
<p>
She pressed him; on which he told Rhoda to wait outside where she stood, and
took Mrs. Lodge into the room. It opened immediately from the door; and, as the
latter remained ajar, Rhoda Brook could see the proceedings without taking part
in them. He brought a tumbler from the dresser, nearly filled it with water,
and fetching an egg, prepared it in some private way; after which he broke it
on the edge of the glass, so that the white went in and the yolk remained. As
it was getting gloomy, he took the glass and its contents to the window, and
told Gertrude to watch them closely. They leant over the table together, and
the milkwoman could see the opaline hue of the egg-fluid changing form as it
sank in the water, but she was not near enough to define the shape that it
assumed.
</p>
<p>
‘Do you catch the likeness of any face or figure as you look?’
demanded the conjuror of the young woman.
</p>
<p>
She murmured a reply, in tones so low as to be inaudible to Rhoda, and
continued to gaze intently into the glass. Rhoda turned, and walked a few steps
away.
</p>
<p>
When Mrs. Lodge came out, and her face was met by the light, it appeared
exceedingly pale—as pale as Rhoda’s—against the sad dun
shades of the upland’s garniture. Trendle shut the door behind her, and
they at once started homeward together. But Rhoda perceived that her companion
had quite changed.
</p>
<p>
‘Did he charge much?’ she asked tentatively.
</p>
<p>
‘O no—nothing. He would not take a farthing,’ said Gertrude.
</p>
<p>
‘And what did you see?’ inquired Rhoda.
</p>
<p>
‘Nothing I—care to speak of.’ The constraint in her manner
was remarkable; her face was so rigid as to wear an oldened aspect, faintly
suggestive of the face in Rhoda’s bed-chamber.
</p>
<p>
‘Was it you who first proposed coming here?’ Mrs. Lodge suddenly
inquired, after a long pause. ‘How very odd, if you did!’
</p>
<p>
‘No. But I am not sorry we have come, all things considered,’ she
replied. For the first time a sense of triumph possessed her, and she did not
altogether deplore that the young thing at her side should learn that their
lives had been antagonized by other influences than their own.
</p>
<p>
The subject was no more alluded to during the long and dreary walk home. But in
some way or other a story was whispered about the many-dairied lowland that
winter that Mrs. Lodge’s gradual loss of the use of her left arm was
owing to her being ‘overlooked’ by Rhoda Brook. The latter kept her
own counsel about the incubus, but her face grew sadder and thinner; and in the
spring she and her boy disappeared from the neighbourhood of Holmstoke.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VI—A SECOND ATTEMPT</h3>
<p>
Half-a-dozen years passed away, and Mr. and Mrs. Lodge’s married
experience sank into prosiness, and worse. The farmer was usually gloomy and
silent: the woman whom he had wooed for her grace and beauty was contorted and
disfigured in the left limb; moreover, she had brought him no child, which
rendered it likely that he would be the last of a family who had occupied that
valley for some two hundred years. He thought of Rhoda Brook and her son; and
feared this might be a judgment from heaven upon him.
</p>
<p>
The once blithe-hearted and enlightened Gertrude was changing into an
irritable, superstitious woman, whose whole time was given to experimenting
upon her ailment with every quack remedy she came across. She was honestly
attached to her husband, and was ever secretly hoping against hope to win back
his heart again by regaining some at least of her personal beauty. Hence it
arose that her closet was lined with bottles, packets, and ointment-pots of
every description—nay, bunches of mystic herbs, charms, and books of
necromancy, which in her schoolgirl time she would have ridiculed as folly.
</p>
<p>
‘Damned if you won’t poison yourself with these apothecary messes
and witch mixtures some time or other,’ said her husband, when his eye
chanced to fall upon the multitudinous array.
</p>
<p>
She did not reply, but turned her sad, soft glance upon him in such
heart-swollen reproach that he looked sorry for his words, and added, ‘I
only meant it for your good, you know, Gertrude.’
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll clear out the whole lot, and destroy them,’ said she
huskily, ‘and try such remedies no more!’
</p>
<p>
‘You want somebody to cheer you,’ he observed. ‘I once
thought of adopting a boy; but he is too old now. And he is gone away I
don’t know where.’
</p>
<p>
She guessed to whom he alluded; for Rhoda Brook’s story had in the course
of years become known to her; though not a word had ever passed between her
husband and herself on the subject. Neither had she ever spoken to him of her
visit to Conjuror Trendle, and of what was revealed to her, or she thought was
revealed to her, by that solitary heath-man.
</p>
<p>
She was now five-and-twenty; but she seemed older.
</p>
<p>
‘Six years of marriage, and only a few months of love,’ she
sometimes whispered to herself. And then she thought of the apparent cause, and
said, with a tragic glance at her withering limb, ‘If I could only again
be as I was when he first saw me!’
</p>
<p>
She obediently destroyed her nostrums and charms; but there remained a
hankering wish to try something else—some other sort of cure altogether.
She had never revisited Trendle since she had been conducted to the house of
the solitary by Rhoda against her will; but it now suddenly occurred to
Gertrude that she would, in a last desperate effort at deliverance from this
seeming curse, again seek out the man, if he yet lived. He was entitled to a
certain credence, for the indistinct form he had raised in the glass had
undoubtedly resembled the only woman in the world who—as she now knew,
though not then—could have a reason for bearing her ill-will. The visit
should be paid.
</p>
<p>
This time she went alone, though she nearly got lost on the heath, and roamed a
considerable distance out of her way. Trendle’s house was reached at
last, however: he was not indoors, and instead of waiting at the cottage, she
went to where his bent figure was pointed out to her at work a long way off.
Trendle remembered her, and laying down the handful of furze-roots which he was
gathering and throwing into a heap, he offered to accompany her in her homeward
direction, as the distance was considerable and the days were short. So they
walked together, his head bowed nearly to the earth, and his form of a colour
with it.
</p>
<p>
‘You can send away warts and other excrescences I know,’ she said;
‘why can’t you send away this?’ And the arm was uncovered.
</p>
<p>
‘You think too much of my powers!’ said Trendle; ‘and I am
old and weak now, too. No, no; it is too much for me to attempt in my own
person. What have ye tried?’
</p>
<p>
She named to him some of the hundred medicaments and counterspells which she
had adopted from time to time. He shook his head.
</p>
<p>
‘Some were good enough,’ he said approvingly; ‘but not many
of them for such as this. This is of the nature of a blight, not of the nature
of a wound; and if you ever do throw it off; it will be all at once.’
</p>
<p>
‘If I only could!’
</p>
<p>
‘There is only one chance of doing it known to me. It has never failed in
kindred afflictions,—that I can declare. But it is hard to carry out, and
especially for a woman.’
</p>
<p>
‘Tell me!’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘You must touch with the limb the neck of a man who’s been
hanged.’
</p>
<p>
She started a little at the image he had raised.
</p>
<p>
‘Before he’s cold—just after he’s cut down,’
continued the conjuror impassively.
</p>
<p>
‘How can that do good?’
</p>
<p>
‘It will turn the blood and change the constitution. But, as I say, to do
it is hard. You must get into jail, and wait for him when he’s brought
off the gallows. Lots have done it, though perhaps not such pretty women as
you. I used to send dozens for skin complaints. But that was in former times.
The last I sent was in ‘13—near twenty years ago.’
</p>
<p>
He had no more to tell her; and, when he had put her into a straight track
homeward, turned and left her, refusing all money as at first.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VII—A RIDE</h3>
<p>
The communication sank deep into Gertrude’s mind. Her nature was rather a
timid one; and probably of all remedies that the white wizard could have
suggested there was not one which would have filled her with so much aversion
as this, not to speak of the immense obstacles in the way of its adoption.
</p>
<p>
Casterbridge, the county-town, was a dozen or fifteen miles off; and though in
those days, when men were executed for horse-stealing, arson, and burglary, an
assize seldom passed without a hanging, it was not likely that she could get
access to the body of the criminal unaided. And the fear of her husband’s
anger made her reluctant to breathe a word of Trendle’s suggestion to him
or to anybody about him.
</p>
<p>
She did nothing for months, and patiently bore her disfigurement as before. But
her woman’s nature, craving for renewed love, through the medium of
renewed beauty (she was but twenty-five), was ever stimulating her to try what,
at any rate, could hardly do her any harm. ‘What came by a spell will go
by a spell surely,’ she would say. Whenever her imagination pictured the
act she shrank in terror from the possibility of it: then the words of the
conjuror, ‘It will turn your blood,’ were seen to be capable of a
scientific no less than a ghastly interpretation; the mastering desire
returned, and urged her on again.
</p>
<p>
There was at this time but one county paper, and that her husband only
occasionally borrowed. But old-fashioned days had old-fashioned means, and news
was extensively conveyed by word of mouth from market to market, or from fair
to fair, so that, whenever such an event as an execution was about to take
place, few within a radius of twenty miles were ignorant of the coming sight;
and, so far as Holmstoke was concerned, some enthusiasts had been known to walk
all the way to Casterbridge and back in one day, solely to witness the
spectacle. The next assizes were in March; and when Gertrude Lodge heard that
they had been held, she inquired stealthily at the inn as to the result, as
soon as she could find opportunity.
</p>
<p>
She was, however, too late. The time at which the sentences were to be carried
out had arrived, and to make the journey and obtain admission at such short
notice required at least her husband’s assistance. She dared not tell
him, for she had found by delicate experiment that these smouldering village
beliefs made him furious if mentioned, partly because he half entertained them
himself. It was therefore necessary to wait for another opportunity.
</p>
<p>
Her determination received a fillip from learning that two epileptic children
had attended from this very village of Holmstoke many years before with
beneficial results, though the experiment had been strongly condemned by the
neighbouring clergy. April, May, June, passed; and it is no overstatement to
say that by the end of the last-named month Gertrude well-nigh longed for the
death of a fellow-creature. Instead of her formal prayers each night, her
unconscious prayer was, ‘O Lord, hang some guilty or innocent person
soon!’
</p>
<p>
This time she made earlier inquiries, and was altogether more systematic in her
proceedings. Moreover, the season was summer, between the haymaking and the
harvest, and in the leisure thus afforded him her husband had been
holiday-taking away from home.
</p>
<p>
The assizes were in July, and she went to the inn as before. There was to be
one execution—only one—for arson.
</p>
<p>
Her greatest problem was not how to get to Casterbridge, but what means she
should adopt for obtaining admission to the jail. Though access for such
purposes had formerly never been denied, the custom had fallen into desuetude;
and in contemplating her possible difficulties, she was again almost driven to
fall back upon her husband. But, on sounding him about the assizes, he was so
uncommunicative, so more than usually cold, that she did not proceed, and
decided that whatever she did she would do alone.
</p>
<p>
Fortune, obdurate hitherto, showed her unexpected favour. On the Thursday
before the Saturday fixed for the execution, Lodge remarked to her that he was
going away from home for another day or two on business at a fair, and that he
was sorry he could not take her with him.
</p>
<p>
She exhibited on this occasion so much readiness to stay at home that he looked
at her in surprise. Time had been when she would have shown deep disappointment
at the loss of such a jaunt. However, he lapsed into his usual taciturnity, and
on the day named left Holmstoke.
</p>
<p>
It was now her turn. She at first had thought of driving, but on reflection
held that driving would not do, since it would necessitate her keeping to the
turnpike-road, and so increase by tenfold the risk of her ghastly errand being
found out. She decided to ride, and avoid the beaten track, notwithstanding
that in her husband’s stables there was no animal just at present which
by any stretch of imagination could be considered a lady’s mount, in
spite of his promise before marriage to always keep a mare for her. He had,
however, many cart-horses, fine ones of their kind; and among the rest was a
serviceable creature, an equine Amazon, with a back as broad as a sofa, on
which Gertrude had occasionally taken an airing when unwell. This horse she
chose.
</p>
<p>
On Friday afternoon one of the men brought it round. She was dressed, and
before going down looked at her shrivelled arm. ‘Ah!’ she said to
it, ‘if it had not been for you this terrible ordeal would have been
saved me!’
</p>
<p>
When strapping up the bundle in which she carried a few articles of clothing,
she took occasion to say to the servant, ‘I take these in case I should
not get back to-night from the person I am going to visit. Don’t be
alarmed if I am not in by ten, and close up the house as usual. I shall be at
home to-morrow for certain.’ She meant then to privately tell her
husband: the deed accomplished was not like the deed projected. He would almost
certainly forgive her.
</p>
<p>
And then the pretty palpitating Gertrude Lodge went from her husband’s
homestead; but though her goal was Casterbridge she did not take the direct
route thither through Stickleford. Her cunning course at first was in precisely
the opposite direction. As soon as she was out of sight, however, she turned to
the left, by a road which led into Egdon, and on entering the heath wheeled
round, and set out in the true course, due westerly. A more private way down
the county could not be imagined; and as to direction, she had merely to keep
her horse’s head to a point a little to the right of the sun. She knew
that she would light upon a furze-cutter or cottager of some sort from time to
time, from whom she might correct her bearing.
</p>
<p>
Though the date was comparatively recent, Egdon was much less fragmentary in
character than now. The attempts—successful and otherwise—at
cultivation on the lower slopes, which intrude and break up the original heath
into small detached heaths, had not been carried far; Enclosure Acts had not
taken effect, and the banks and fences which now exclude the cattle of those
villagers who formerly enjoyed rights of commonage thereon, and the carts of
those who had turbary privileges which kept them in firing all the year round,
were not erected. Gertrude, therefore, rode along with no other obstacles than
the prickly furze bushes, the mats of heather, the white water-courses, and the
natural steeps and declivities of the ground.
</p>
<p>
Her horse was sure, if heavy-footed and slow, and though a draught animal, was
easy-paced; had it been otherwise, she was not a woman who could have ventured
to ride over such a bit of country with a half-dead arm. It was therefore
nearly eight o’clock when she drew rein to breathe the mare on the last
outlying high point of heath-land towards Casterbridge, previous to leaving
Egdon for the cultivated valleys.
</p>
<p>
She halted before a pool called Rushy-pond, flanked by the ends of two hedges;
a railing ran through the centre of the pond, dividing it in half. Over the
railing she saw the low green country; over the green trees the roofs of the
town; over the roofs a white flat façade, denoting the entrance to the
county jail. On the roof of this front specks were moving about; they seemed to
be workmen erecting something. Her flesh crept. She descended slowly, and was
soon amid corn-fields and pastures. In another half-hour, when it was almost
dusk, Gertrude reached the White Hart, the first inn of the town on that side.
</p>
<p>
Little surprise was excited by her arrival; farmers’ wives rode on
horseback then more than they do now; though, for that matter, Mrs. Lodge was
not imagined to be a wife at all; the innkeeper supposed her some harum-skarum
young woman who had come to attend ‘hang-fair’ next day. Neither
her husband nor herself ever dealt in Casterbridge market, so that she was
unknown. While dismounting she beheld a crowd of boys standing at the door of a
harness-maker’s shop just above the inn, looking inside it with deep
interest.
</p>
<p>
‘What is going on there?’ she asked of the ostler.
</p>
<p>
‘Making the rope for to-morrow.’
</p>
<p>
She throbbed responsively, and contracted her arm.
</p>
<p>
‘’Tis sold by the inch afterwards,’ the man continued.
‘I could get you a bit, miss, for nothing, if you’d like?’
</p>
<p>
She hastily repudiated any such wish, all the more from a curious creeping
feeling that the condemned wretch’s destiny was becoming interwoven with
her own; and having engaged a room for the night, sat down to think.
</p>
<p>
Up to this time she had formed but the vaguest notions about her means of
obtaining access to the prison. The words of the cunning-man returned to her
mind. He had implied that she should use her beauty, impaired though it was, as
a pass-key. In her inexperience she knew little about jail functionaries; she
had heard of a high-sheriff and an under-sheriff; but dimly only. She knew,
however, that there must be a hangman, and to the hangman she determined to
apply.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VIII—A WATER-SIDE HERMIT</h3>
<p>
At this date, and for several years after, there was a hangman to almost every
jail. Gertrude found, on inquiry, that the Casterbridge official dwelt in a
lonely cottage by a deep slow river flowing under the cliff on which the prison
buildings were situate—the stream being the self-same one, though she did
not know it, which watered the Stickleford and Holmstoke meads lower down in
its course.
</p>
<p>
Having changed her dress, and before she had eaten or drunk—for she could
not take her ease till she had ascertained some particulars—Gertrude
pursued her way by a path along the water-side to the cottage indicated.
Passing thus the outskirts of the jail, she discerned on the level roof over
the gateway three rectangular lines against the sky, where the specks had been
moving in her distant view; she recognized what the erection was, and passed
quickly on. Another hundred yards brought her to the executioner’s house,
which a boy pointed out It stood close to the same stream, and was hard by a
weir, the waters of which emitted a steady roar.
</p>
<p>
While she stood hesitating the door opened, and an old man came forth shading a
candle with one hand. Locking the door on the outside, he turned to a flight of
wooden steps fixed against the end of the cottage, and began to ascend them,
this being evidently the staircase to his bedroom. Gertrude hastened forward,
but by the time she reached the foot of the ladder he was at the top. She
called to him loudly enough to be heard above the roar of the weir; he looked
down and said, ‘What d’ye want here?’
</p>
<p>
‘To speak to you a minute.’
</p>
<p>
The candle-light, such as it was, fell upon her imploring, pale, upturned face,
and Davies (as the hangman was called) backed down the ladder. ‘I was
just going to bed,’ he said; ‘“Early to bed and early to
rise,” but I don’t mind stopping a minute for such a one as you.
Come into house.’ He reopened the door, and preceded her to the room
within.
</p>
<p>
The implements of his daily work, which was that of a jobbing gardener, stood
in a corner, and seeing probably that she looked rural, he said, ‘If you
want me to undertake country work I can’t come, for I never leave
Casterbridge for gentle nor simple—not I. My real calling is officer of
justice,’ he added formally.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes! That’s it. To-morrow!’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah! I thought so. Well, what’s the matter about that? ’Tis
no use to come here about the knot—folks do come continually, but I tell
’em one knot is as merciful as another if ye keep it under the ear. Is
the unfortunate man a relation; or, I should say, perhaps’ (looking at
her dress) ‘a person who’s been in your employ?’
</p>
<p>
‘No. What time is the execution?’
</p>
<p>
‘The same as usual—twelve o’clock, or as soon after as the
London mail-coach gets in. We always wait for that, in case of a
reprieve.’
</p>
<p>
‘O—a reprieve—I hope not!’ she said involuntarily,
</p>
<p>
‘Well,—hee, hee!—as a matter of business, so do I! But still,
if ever a young fellow deserved to be let off, this one does; only just turned
eighteen, and only present by chance when the rick was fired. Howsomever,
there’s not much risk of it, as they are obliged to make an example of
him, there having been so much destruction of property that way lately.’
</p>
<p>
‘I mean,’ she explained, ‘that I want to touch him for a
charm, a cure of an affliction, by the advice of a man who has proved the
virtue of the remedy.’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes, miss! Now I understand. I’ve had such people come in past
years. But it didn’t strike me that you looked of a sort to require
blood-turning. What’s the complaint? The wrong kind for this, I’ll
be bound.’
</p>
<p>
‘My arm.’ She reluctantly showed the withered skin.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah—’tis all a-scram!’ said the hangman, examining it.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘Well,’ he continued, with interest, ‘that <i>is</i> the
class o’ subject, I’m bound to admit! I like the look of the place;
it is truly as suitable for the cure as any I ever saw. ’Twas a
knowing-man that sent ‘ee, whoever he was.’
</p>
<p>
‘You can contrive for me all that’s necessary?’ she said
breathlessly.
</p>
<p>
‘You should really have gone to the governor of the jail, and your doctor
with ‘ee, and given your name and address—that’s how it used
to be done, if I recollect. Still, perhaps, I can manage it for a trifling
fee.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, thank you! I would rather do it this way, as I should like it kept
private.’
</p>
<p>
‘Lover not to know, eh?’
</p>
<p>
‘No—husband.’
</p>
<p>
‘Aha! Very well. I’ll get ee’ a touch of the corpse.’
</p>
<p>
‘Where is it now?’ she said, shuddering.
</p>
<p>
‘It?<i>—he</i>, you mean; he’s living yet. Just inside that
little small winder up there in the glum.’ He signified the jail on the
cliff above.
</p>
<p>
She thought of her husband and her friends. ‘Yes, of course,’ she
said; ‘and how am I to proceed?’
</p>
<p>
He took her to the door. ‘Now, do you be waiting at the little wicket in
the wall, that you’ll find up there in the lane, not later than one
o’clock. I will open it from the inside, as I shan’t come home to
dinner till he’s cut down. Good-night. Be punctual; and if you
don’t want anybody to know ‘ee, wear a veil. Ah—once I had
such a daughter as you!’
</p>
<p>
She went away, and climbed the path above, to assure herself that she would be
able to find the wicket next day. Its outline was soon visible to her—a
narrow opening in the outer wall of the prison precincts. The steep was so
great that, having reached the wicket, she stopped a moment to breathe; and,
looking back upon the water-side cot, saw the hangman again ascending his
outdoor staircase. He entered the loft or chamber to which it led, and in a few
minutes extinguished his light.
</p>
<p>
The town clock struck ten, and she returned to the White Hart as she had come.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IX—A RENCOUNTER</h3>
<p>
It was one o’clock on Saturday. Gertrude Lodge, having been admitted to
the jail as above described, was sitting in a waiting-room within the second
gate, which stood under a classic archway of ashlar, then comparatively modern,
and bearing the inscription, ‘COVNTY JAIL: 1793.’ This had been the
façade she saw from the heath the day before. Near at hand was a passage
to the roof on which the gallows stood.
</p>
<p>
The town was thronged, and the market suspended; but Gertrude had seen scarcely
a soul. Having kept her room till the hour of the appointment, she had
proceeded to the spot by a way which avoided the open space below the cliff
where the spectators had gathered; but she could, even now, hear the
multitudinous babble of their voices, out of which rose at intervals the hoarse
croak of a single voice uttering the words, ‘Last dying speech and
confession!’ There had been no reprieve, and the execution was over; but
the crowd still waited to see the body taken down.
</p>
<p>
Soon the persistent girl heard a trampling overhead, then a hand beckoned to
her, and, following directions, she went out and crossed the inner paved court
beyond the gatehouse, her knees trembling so that she could scarcely walk. One
of her arms was out of its sleeve, and only covered by her shawl.
</p>
<p>
On the spot at which she had now arrived were two trestles, and before she
could think of their purpose she heard heavy feet descending stairs somewhere
at her back. Turn her head she would not, or could not, and, rigid in this
position, she was conscious of a rough coffin passing her shoulder, borne by
four men. It was open, and in it lay the body of a young man, wearing the
smockfrock of a rustic, and fustian breeches. The corpse had been thrown into
the coffin so hastily that the skirt of the smockfrock was hanging over. The
burden was temporarily deposited on the trestles.
</p>
<p>
By this time the young woman’s state was such that a gray mist seemed to
float before her eyes, on account of which, and the veil she wore, she could
scarcely discern anything: it was as though she had nearly died, but was held
up by a sort of galvanism.
</p>
<p>
‘Now!’ said a voice close at hand, and she was just conscious that
the word had been addressed to her.
</p>
<p>
By a last strenuous effort she advanced, at the same time hearing persons
approaching behind her. She bared her poor curst arm; and Davies, uncovering
the face of the corpse, took Gertrude’s hand, and held it so that her arm
lay across the dead man’s neck, upon a line the colour of an unripe
blackberry, which surrounded it.
</p>
<p>
Gertrude shrieked: ‘the turn o’ the blood,’ predicted by the
conjuror, had taken place. But at that moment a second shriek rent the air of
the enclosure: it was not Gertrude’s, and its effect upon her was to make
her start round.
</p>
<p>
Immediately behind her stood Rhoda Brook, her face drawn, and her eyes red with
weeping. Behind Rhoda stood Gertrude’s own husband; his countenance
lined, his eyes dim, but without a tear.
</p>
<p>
‘D-n you! what are you doing here?’ he said hoarsely.
</p>
<p>
‘Hussy—to come between us and our child now!’ cried Rhoda.
‘This is the meaning of what Satan showed me in the vision! You are like
her at last!’ And clutching the bare arm of the younger woman, she pulled
her unresistingly back against the wall. Immediately Brook had loosened her
hold the fragile young Gertrude slid down against the feet of her husband. When
he lifted her up she was unconscious.
</p>
<p>
The mere sight of the twain had been enough to suggest to her that the dead
young man was Rhoda’s son. At that time the relatives of an executed
convict had the privilege of claiming the body for burial, if they chose to do
so; and it was for this purpose that Lodge was awaiting the inquest with Rhoda.
He had been summoned by her as soon as the young man was taken in the crime,
and at different times since; and he had attended in court during the trial.
This was the ‘holiday’ he had been indulging in of late. The two
wretched parents had wished to avoid exposure; and hence had come themselves
for the body, a waggon and sheet for its conveyance and covering being in
waiting outside.
</p>
<p>
Gertrude’s case was so serious that it was deemed advisable to call to
her the surgeon who was at hand. She was taken out of the jail into the town;
but she never reached home alive. Her delicate vitality, sapped perhaps by the
paralyzed arm, collapsed under the double shock that followed the severe
strain, physical and mental, to which she had subjected herself during the
previous twenty-four hours. Her blood had been ‘turned’
indeed—too far. Her death took place in the town three days after.
</p>
<p>
Her husband was never seen in Casterbridge again; once only in the old
market-place at Anglebury, which he had so much frequented, and very seldom in
public anywhere. Burdened at first with moodiness and remorse, he eventually
changed for the better, and appeared as a chastened and thoughtful man. Soon
after attending the funeral of his poor young wife he took steps towards giving
up the farms in Holmstoke and the adjoining parish, and, having sold every head
of his stock, he went away to Port-Bredy, at the other end of the county,
living there in solitary lodgings till his death two years later of a painless
decline. It was then found that he had bequeathed the whole of his not
inconsiderable property to a reformatory for boys, subject to the payment of a
small annuity to Rhoda Brook, if she could be found to claim it.
</p>
<p>
For some time she could not be found; but eventually she reappeared in her old
parish,—absolutely refusing, however, to have anything to do with the
provision made for her. Her monotonous milking at the dairy was resumed, and
followed for many long years, till her form became bent, and her once abundant
dark hair white and worn away at the forehead—perhaps by long pressure
against the cows. Here, sometimes, those who knew her experiences would stand
and observe her, and wonder what sombre thoughts were beating inside that
impassive, wrinkled brow, to the rhythm of the alternating milk-streams.
</p>
<p class="p2">
(‘<i>Blackwood’s Magazine</i>,’ <i>January</i> 1888.)
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap05"/>FELLOW-TOWNSMEN</h2>
<h3>CHAPTER I</h3>
<p>
The shepherd on the east hill could shout out lambing intelligence to the
shepherd on the west hill, over the intervening town chimneys, without great
inconvenience to his voice, so nearly did the steep pastures encroach upon the
burghers’ backyards. And at night it was possible to stand in the very
midst of the town and hear from their native paddocks on the lower levels of
greensward the mild lowing of the farmer’s heifers, and the profound,
warm blowings of breath in which those creatures indulge. But the community
which had jammed itself in the valley thus flanked formed a veritable town,
with a real mayor and corporation, and a staple manufacture.
</p>
<p>
During a certain damp evening five-and-thirty years ago, before the twilight
was far advanced, a pedestrian of professional appearance, carrying a small bag
in his hand and an elevated umbrella, was descending one of these hills by the
turnpike road when he was overtaken by a phaeton.
</p>
<p>
‘Hullo, Downe—is that you?’ said the driver of the vehicle, a
young man of pale and refined appearance. ‘Jump up here with me, and ride
down to your door.’
</p>
<p>
The other turned a plump, cheery, rather self-indulgent face over his shoulder
towards the hailer.
</p>
<p>
‘O, good evening, Mr. Barnet—thanks,’ he said, and mounted
beside his acquaintance.
</p>
<p>
They were fellow-burgesses of the town which lay beneath them, but though old
and very good friends, they were differently circumstanced. Barnet was a richer
man than the struggling young lawyer Downe, a fact which was to some extent
perceptible in Downe’s manner towards his companion, though nothing of it
ever showed in Barnet’s manner towards the solicitor. Barnet’s
position in the town was none of his own making; his father had been a very
successful flax-merchant in the same place, where the trade was still carried
on as briskly as the small capacities of its quarters would allow. Having
acquired a fair fortune, old Mr. Barnet had retired from business, bringing up
his son as a gentleman-burgher, and, it must be added, as a well-educated,
liberal-minded young man.
</p>
<p>
‘How is Mrs. Barnet?’ asked Downe.
</p>
<p>
‘Mrs. Barnet was very well when I left home,’ the other answered
constrainedly, exchanging his meditative regard of the horse for one of
self-consciousness.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Downe seemed to regret his inquiry, and immediately took up another thread
of conversation. He congratulated his friend on his election as a council-man;
he thought he had not seen him since that event took place; Mrs. Downe had
meant to call and congratulate Mrs. Barnet, but he feared that she had failed
to do so as yet.
</p>
<p>
Barnet seemed hampered in his replies. <i>‘We</i> should have been glad
to see you. I—my wife would welcome Mrs. Downe at any time, as you know .
. . Yes, I am a member of the corporation—rather an inexperienced member,
some of them say. It is quite true; and I should have declined the honour as
premature—having other things on my hands just now, too—if it had
not been pressed upon me so very heartily.’
</p>
<p>
‘There is one thing you have on your hands which I can never quite see
the necessity for,’ said Downe, with good-humoured freedom. ‘What
the deuce do you want to build that new mansion for, when you have already got
such an excellent house as the one you live in?’
</p>
<p>
Barnet’s face acquired a warmer shade of colour; but as the question had
been idly asked by the solicitor while regarding the surrounding flocks and
fields, he answered after a moment with no apparent embarrassment—
</p>
<p>
‘Well, we wanted to get out of the town, you know: the house I am living
in is rather old and inconvenient.’ Mr. Downe declared that he had chosen
a pretty site for the new building. They would be able to see for miles and
miles from the windows. Was he going to give it a name? He supposed so.
</p>
<p>
Barnet thought not. There was no other house near that was likely to be
mistaken for it. And he did not care for a name.
</p>
<p>
‘But I think it has a name!’ Downe observed: ‘I went
past—when was it?—this morning; and I saw
something,—“Château Ringdale,” I think it was, stuck up
on a board!’
</p>
<p>
‘It was an idea she—we had for a short time,’ said Barnet
hastily. ‘But we have decided finally to do without a name—at any
rate such a name as that. It must have been a week ago that you saw it. It was
taken down last Saturday . . . Upon that matter I am firm!’ he added
grimly.
</p>
<p>
Downe murmured in an unconvinced tone that he thought he had seen it yesterday.
</p>
<p>
Talking thus they drove into the town. The street was unusually still for the
hour of seven in the evening; an increasing drizzle had prevailed since the
afternoon, and now formed a gauze across the yellow lamps, and trickled with a
gentle rattle down the heavy roofs of stone tile, that bent the house-ridges
hollow-backed with its weight, and in some instances caused the walls to bulge
outwards in the upper story. Their route took them past the little town-hall,
the Black-Bull Hotel, and onward to the junction of a small street on the
right, consisting of a row of those two-and-two windowed brick residences of no
particular age, which are exactly alike wherever found, except in the people
they contain.
</p>
<p>
‘Wait—I’ll drive you up to your door,’ said Barnet,
when Downe prepared to alight at the corner. He thereupon turned into the
narrow street, when the faces of three little girls could be discerned close to
the panes of a lighted window a few yards ahead, surmounted by that of a young
matron, the gaze of all four being directed eagerly up the empty street.
‘You are a fortunate fellow, Downe,’ Barnet continued, as mother
and children disappeared from the window to run to the door. ‘You must be
happy if any man is. I would give a hundred such houses as my new one to have a
home like yours.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well—yes, we get along pretty comfortably,’ replied Downe
complacently.
</p>
<p>
‘That house, Downe, is none of my ordering,’ Barnet broke out,
revealing a bitterness hitherto suppressed, and checking the horse a moment to
finish his speech before delivering up his passenger. ‘The house I have
already is good enough for me, as you supposed. It is my own freehold; it was
built by my grandfather, and is stout enough for a castle. My father was born
there, lived there, and died there. I was born there, and have always lived
there; yet I must needs build a new one.’
</p>
<p>
‘Why do you?’ said Downe.
</p>
<p>
‘Why do I? To preserve peace in the household. I do anything for that;
but I don’t succeed. I was firm in resisting “Château
Ringdale,” however; not that I would not have put up with the absurdity
of the name, but it was too much to have your house christened after Lord
Ringdale, because your wife once had a fancy for him. If you only knew
everything, you would think all attempt at reconciliation hopeless. In your
happy home you have had no such experiences; and God forbid that you ever
should. See, here they are all ready to receive you!’
</p>
<p>
‘Of course! And so will your wife be waiting to receive you,’ said
Downe. ‘Take my word for it she will! And with a dinner prepared for you
far better than mine.’
</p>
<p>
‘I hope so,’ Barnet replied dubiously.
</p>
<p>
He moved on to Downe’s door, which the solicitor’s family had
already opened. Downe descended, but being encumbered with his bag and
umbrella, his foot slipped, and he fell upon his knees in the gutter.
</p>
<p>
‘O, my dear Charles!’ said his wife, running down the steps; and,
quite ignoring the presence of Barnet, she seized hold of her husband, pulled
him to his feet, and kissed him, exclaiming, ‘I hope you are not hurt,
darling!’ The children crowded round, chiming in piteously, ‘Poor
papa!’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s all right,’ said Barnet, perceiving that Downe was only
a little muddy, and looking more at the wife than at the husband. Almost at any
other time—certainly during his fastidious bachelor years—he would
have thought her a too demonstrative woman; but those recent circumstances of
his own life to which he had just alluded made Mrs. Downe’s solicitude so
affecting that his eye grew damp as he witnessed it. Bidding the lawyer and his
family good-night he left them, and drove slowly into the main street towards
his own house.
</p>
<p>
The heart of Barnet was sufficiently impressionable to be influenced by
Downe’s parting prophecy that he might not be so unwelcome home as he
imagined: the dreary night might, at least on this one occasion, make
Downe’s forecast true. Hence it was in a suspense that he could hardly
have believed possible that he halted at his door. On entering his wife was
nowhere to be seen, and he inquired for her. The servant informed him that her
mistress had the dressmaker with her, and would be engaged for some time.
</p>
<p>
‘Dressmaker at this time of day!’
</p>
<p>
‘She dined early, sir, and hopes you will excuse her joining you this
evening.’
</p>
<p>
‘But she knew I was coming to-night?’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘Go up and tell her I am come.’
</p>
<p>
The servant did so; but the mistress of the house merely transmitted her former
words.
</p>
<p>
Barnet said nothing more, and presently sat down to his lonely meal, which was
eaten abstractedly, the domestic scene he had lately witnessed still impressing
him by its contrast with the situation here. His mind fell back into past years
upon a certain pleasing and gentle being whose face would loom out of their
shades at such times as these. Barnet turned in his chair, and looked with
unfocused eyes in a direction southward from where he sat, as if he saw not the
room but a long way beyond. ‘I wonder if she lives there still!’ he
said.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II</h3>
<p>
He rose with a sudden rebelliousness, put on his hat and coat, and went out of
the house, pursuing his way along the glistening pavement while eight
o’clock was striking from St. Mary’s tower, and the apprentices and
shopmen were slamming up the shutters from end to end of the town. In two
minutes only those shops which could boast of no attendant save the master or
the mistress remained with open eyes. These were ever somewhat less prompt to
exclude customers than the others: for their owners’ ears the closing
hour had scarcely the cheerfulness that it possessed for the hired servants of
the rest. Yet the night being dreary the delay was not for long, and their
windows, too, blinked together one by one.
</p>
<p>
During this time Barnet had proceeded with decided step in a direction at right
angles to the broad main thoroughfare of the town, by a long street leading due
southward. Here, though his family had no more to do with the flax manufacture,
his own name occasionally greeted him on gates and warehouses, being used
allusively by small rising tradesmen as a recommendation, in such words as
‘Smith, from Barnet &amp; Co.’—‘Robinson, late manager
at Barnet’s.’ The sight led him to reflect upon his father’s
busy life, and he questioned if it had not been far happier than his own.
</p>
<p>
The houses along the road became fewer, and presently open ground appeared
between them on either side, the track on the right hand rising to a higher
level till it merged in a knoll. On the summit a row of builders’
scaffold-poles probed the indistinct sky like spears, and at their bases could
be discerned the lower courses of a building lately begun. Barnet slackened his
pace and stood for a few moments without leaving the centre of the road,
apparently not much interested in the sight, till suddenly his eye was caught
by a post in the fore part of the ground bearing a white board at the top. He
went to the rails, vaulted over, and walked in far enough to discern painted
upon the board ‘Château Ringdale.’
</p>
<p>
A dismal irony seemed to lie in the words, and its effect was to irritate him.
Downe, then, had spoken truly. He stuck his umbrella into the sod, and seized
the post with both hands, as if intending to loosen and throw it down. Then,
like one bewildered by an opposition which would exist none the less though its
manifestations were removed, he allowed his arms to sink to his side.
</p>
<p>
‘Let it be,’ he said to himself. ‘I have declared there shall
be peace—if possible.’
</p>
<p>
Taking up his umbrella he quietly left the enclosure, and went on his way,
still keeping his back to the town. He had advanced with more decision since
passing the new building, and soon a hoarse murmur rose upon the gloom; it was
the sound of the sea. The road led to the harbour, at a distance of a mile from
the town, from which the trade of the district was fed. After seeing the
obnoxious name-board Barnet had forgotten to open his umbrella, and the rain
tapped smartly on his hat, and occasionally stroked his face as he went on.
</p>
<p>
Though the lamps were still continued at the roadside, they stood at wider
intervals than before, and the pavement had given place to common road. Every
time he came to a lamp an increasing shine made itself visible upon his
shoulders, till at last they quite glistened with wet. The murmur from the
shore grew stronger, but it was still some distance off when he paused before
one of the smallest of the detached houses by the wayside, standing in its own
garden, the latter being divided from the road by a row of wooden palings.
Scrutinizing the spot to ensure that he was not mistaken, he opened the gate
and gently knocked at the cottage door.
</p>
<p>
When he had patiently waited minutes enough to lead any man in ordinary cases
to knock again, the door was heard to open, though it was impossible to see by
whose hand, there being no light in the passage. Barnet said at random,
‘Does Miss Savile live here?’
</p>
<p>
A youthful voice assured him that she did live there, and by a sudden
afterthought asked him to come in. It would soon get a light, it said: but the
night being wet, mother had not thought it worth while to trim the passage
lamp.
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t trouble yourself to get a light for me,’ said Barnet
hastily; ‘it is not necessary at all. Which is Miss Savile’s
sitting-room?’
</p>
<p>
The young person, whose white pinafore could just be discerned, signified a
door in the side of the passage, and Barnet went forward at the same moment, so
that no light should fall upon his face. On entering the room he closed the
door behind him, pausing till he heard the retreating footsteps of the child.
</p>
<p>
He found himself in an apartment which was simply and neatly, though not poorly
furnished; everything, from the miniature chiffonnier to the shining little
daguerreotype which formed the central ornament of the mantelpiece, being in
scrupulous order. The picture was enclosed by a frame of embroidered
card-board—evidently the work of feminine hands—and it was the
portrait of a thin faced, elderly lieutenant in the navy. From behind the lamp
on the table a female form now rose into view, that of a young girl, and a
resemblance between her and the portrait was early discoverable. She had been
so absorbed in some occupation on the other side of the lamp as to have barely
found time to realize her visitor’s presence.
</p>
<p>
They both remained standing for a few seconds without speaking. The face that
confronted Barnet had a beautiful outline; the Raffaelesque oval of its contour
was remarkable for an English countenance, and that countenance housed in a
remote country-road to an unheard-of harbour. But her features did not do
justice to this splendid beginning: Nature had recollected that she was not in
Italy; and the young lady’s lineaments, though not so inconsistent as to
make her plain, would have been accepted rather as pleasing than as correct.
The preoccupied expression which, like images on the retina, remained with her
for a moment after the state that caused it had ceased, now changed into a
reserved, half-proud, and slightly indignant look, in which the blood diffused
itself quickly across her cheek, and additional brightness broke the shade of
her rather heavy eyes.
</p>
<p>
‘I know I have no business here,’ he said, answering the look.
‘But I had a great wish to see you, and inquire how you were. You can
give your hand to me, seeing how often I have held it in past days?’
</p>
<p>
‘I would rather forget than remember all that, Mr. Barnet,’ she
answered, as she coldly complied with the request. ‘When I think of the
circumstances of our last meeting, I can hardly consider it kind of you to
allude to such a thing as our past—or, indeed, to come here at
all.’
</p>
<p>
‘There was no harm in it surely? I don’t trouble you often,
Lucy.’
</p>
<p>
‘I have not had the honour of a visit from you for a very long time,
certainly, and I did not expect it now,’ she said, with the same
stiffness in her air. ‘I hope Mrs. Barnet is very well?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes!’ he impatiently returned. ‘At least I suppose
so—though I only speak from inference!’
</p>
<p>
‘But she is your wife, sir,’ said the young girl tremulously.
</p>
<p>
The unwonted tones of a man’s voice in that feminine chamber had startled
a canary that was roosting in its cage by the window; the bird awoke hastily,
and fluttered against the bars. She went and stilled it by laying her face
against the cage and murmuring a coaxing sound. It might partly have been done
to still herself.
</p>
<p>
‘I didn’t come to talk of Mrs. Barnet,’ he pursued; ‘I
came to talk of you, of yourself alone; to inquire how you are getting on since
your great loss.’ And he turned towards the portrait of her father.
</p>
<p>
‘I am getting on fairly well, thank you.’
</p>
<p>
The force of her utterance was scarcely borne out by her look; but Barnet
courteously reproached himself for not having guessed a thing so natural; and
to dissipate all embarrassment, added, as he bent over the table, ‘What
were you doing when I came?—painting flowers, and by candlelight?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ she said, ‘not painting them—only sketching the
outlines. I do that at night to save time—I have to get three dozen done
by the end of the month.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet looked as if he regretted it deeply. ‘You will wear your poor eyes
out,’ he said, with more sentiment than he had hitherto shown. ‘You
ought not to do it. There was a time when I should have said you must not.
Well—I almost wish I had never seen light with my own eyes when I think
of that!’
</p>
<p>
‘Is this a time or place for recalling such matters?’ she asked,
with dignity. ‘You used to have a gentlemanly respect for me, and for
yourself. Don’t speak any more as you have spoken, and don’t come
again. I cannot think that this visit is serious, or was closely considered by
you.’
</p>
<p>
‘Considered: well, I came to see you as an old and good friend—not
to mince matters, to visit a woman I loved. Don’t be angry! I could not
help doing it, so many things brought you into my mind . . . This evening I
fell in with an acquaintance, and when I saw how happy he was with his wife and
family welcoming him home, though with only one-tenth of my income and chances,
and thought what might have been in my case, it fairly broke down my
discretion, and off I came here. Now I am here I feel that I am wrong to some
extent. But the feeling that I should like to see you, and talk of those we
used to know in common, was very strong.’
</p>
<p>
‘Before that can be the case a little more time must pass,’ said
Miss Savile quietly; ‘a time long enough for me to regard with some
calmness what at present I remember far too impatiently—though it may be
you almost forget it. Indeed you must have forgotten it long before you acted
as you did.’ Her voice grew stronger and more vivacious as she added:
‘But I am doing my best to forget it too, and I know I shall succeed from
the progress I have made already!’
</p>
<p>
She had remained standing till now, when she turned and sat down, facing half
away from him.
</p>
<p>
Barnet watched her moodily. ‘Yes, it is only what I deserve,’ he
said. ‘Ambition pricked me on—no, it was not ambition, it was
wrongheadedness! Had I but reflected . . . ’ He broke out vehemently:
‘But always remember this, Lucy: if you had written to me only one little
line after that misunderstanding, I declare I should have come back to you.
That ruined me!’ he slowly walked as far as the little room would allow
him to go, and remained with his eyes on the skirting.
</p>
<p>
‘But, Mr. Barnet, how could I write to you? There was no opening for my
doing so.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then there ought to have been,’ said Barnet, turning. ‘That
was my fault!’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I don’t know anything about that; but as there had been
nothing said by me which required any explanation by letter, I did not send
one. Everything was so indefinite, and feeling your position to be so much
wealthier than mine, I fancied I might have mistaken your meaning. And when I
heard of the other lady—a woman of whose family even you might be
proud—I thought how foolish I had been, and said nothing.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then I suppose it was destiny—accident—I don’t know
what, that separated us, dear Lucy. Anyhow you were the woman I ought to have
made my wife—and I let you slip, like the foolish man that I was!’
</p>
<p>
‘O, Mr. Barnet,’ she said, almost in tears, ‘don’t
revive the subject to me; I am the wrong one to console you—think,
sir,—you should not be here—it would be so bad for me if it were
known!’
</p>
<p>
‘It would—it would, indeed,’ he said hastily. ‘I am not
right in doing this, and I won’t do it again.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is a very common folly of human nature, you know, to think the course
you did <i>not</i> adopt must have been the best,’ she continued, with
gentle solicitude, as she followed him to the door of the room. ‘And you
don’t know that I should have accepted you, even if you had asked me to
be your wife.’ At this his eye met hers, and she dropped her gaze. She
knew that her voice belied her. There was a silence till she looked up to add,
in a voice of soothing playfulness, ‘My family was so much poorer than
yours, even before I lost my dear father, that—perhaps your companions
would have made it unpleasant for us on account of my deficiencies.’
</p>
<p>
‘Your disposition would soon have won them round,’ said Barnet.
</p>
<p>
She archly expostulated: ‘Now, never mind my disposition; try to make it
up with your wife! Those are my commands to you. And now you are to leave me at
once.’
</p>
<p>
‘I will. I must make the best of it all, I suppose,’ he replied,
more cheerfully than he had as yet spoken. ‘But I shall never again meet
with such a dear girl as you!’ And he suddenly opened the door, and left
her alone. When his glance again fell on the lamps that were sparsely ranged
along the dreary level road, his eyes were in a state which showed straw-like
motes of light radiating from each flame into the surrounding air.
</p>
<p>
On the other side of the way Barnet observed a man under an umbrella, walking
parallel with himself. Presently this man left the footway, and gradually
converged on Barnet’s course. The latter then saw that it was Charlson, a
surgeon of the town, who owed him money. Charlson was a man not without
ability; yet he did not prosper. Sundry circumstances stood in his way as a
medical practitioner: he was needy; he was not a coddle; he gossiped with men
instead of with women; he had married a stranger instead of one of the town
young ladies; and he was given to conversational buffoonery. Moreover, his look
was quite erroneous. Those only proper features in the family doctor, the quiet
eye, and the thin straight passionless lips which never curl in public either
for laughter or for scorn, were not his; he had a full-curved mouth, and a bold
black eye that made timid people nervous. His companions were what in old times
would have been called boon companions—an expression which, though of
irreproachable root, suggests fraternization carried to the point of
unscrupulousness. All this was against him in the little town of his adoption.
</p>
<p>
Charlson had been in difficulties, and to oblige him Barnet had put his name to
a bill; and, as he had expected, was called upon to meet it when it fell due.
It had been only a matter of fifty pounds, which Barnet could well afford to
lose, and he bore no ill-will to the thriftless surgeon on account of it. But
Charlson had a little too much brazen indifferentism in his composition to be
altogether a desirable acquaintance.
</p>
<p>
‘I hope to be able to make that little bill-business right with you in
the course of three weeks, Mr. Barnet,’ said Charlson with hail-fellow
friendliness.
</p>
<p>
Barnet replied good-naturedly that there was no hurry.
</p>
<p>
This particular three weeks had moved on in advance of Charlson’s present
with the precision of a shadow for some considerable time.
</p>
<p>
‘I’ve had a dream,’ Charlson continued. Barnet knew from his
tone that the surgeon was going to begin his characteristic nonsense, and did
not encourage him. ‘I’ve had a dream,’ repeated Charlson, who
required no encouragement. ‘I dreamed that a gentleman, who has been very
kind to me, married a haughty lady in haste, before he had quite forgotten a
nice little girl he knew before, and that one wet evening, like the present, as
I was walking up the harbour-road, I saw him come out of that dear little
girl’s present abode.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet glanced towards the speaker. The rays from a neighbouring lamp struck
through the drizzle under Charlson’s umbrella, so as just to illumine his
face against the shade behind, and show that his eye was turned up under the
outer corner of its lid, whence it leered with impish jocoseness as he thrust
his tongue into his cheek.
</p>
<p>
‘Come,’ said Barnet gravely, ‘we’ll have no more of
that.’
</p>
<p>
‘No, no—of course not,’ Charlson hastily answered, seeing
that his humour had carried him too far, as it had done many times before. He
was profuse in his apologies, but Barnet did not reply. Of one thing he was
certain—that scandal was a plant of quick root, and that he was bound to
obey Lucy’s injunction for Lucy’s own sake.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER III</h3>
<p>
He did so, to the letter; and though, as the crocus followed the snowdrop and
the daffodil the crocus in Lucy’s garden, the harbour-road was a not
unpleasant place to walk in, Barnet’s feet never trod its stones, much
less approached her door. He avoided a saunter that way as he would have
avoided a dangerous dram, and took his airings a long distance northward, among
severely square and brown ploughed fields, where no other townsman came.
Sometimes he went round by the lower lanes of the borough, where the rope-walks
stretched in which his family formerly had share, and looked at the rope-makers
walking backwards, overhung by apple-trees and bushes, and intruded on by cows
and calves, as if trade had established itself there at considerable
inconvenience to Nature.
</p>
<p>
One morning, when the sun was so warm as to raise a steam from the
south-eastern slopes of those flanking hills that looked so lovely above the
old roofs, but made every low-chimneyed house in the town as smoky as Tophet,
Barnet glanced from the windows of the town-council room for lack of interest
in what was proceeding within. Several members of the corporation were present,
but there was not much business doing, and in a few minutes Downe came
leisurely across to him, saying that he seldom saw Barnet now.
</p>
<p>
Barnet owned that he was not often present.
</p>
<p>
Downe looked at the crimson curtain which hung down beside the panes,
reflecting its hot hues into their faces, and then out of the window. At that
moment there passed along the street a tall commanding lady, in whom the
solicitor recognized Barnet’s wife. Barnet had done the same thing, and
turned away.
</p>
<p>
‘It will be all right some day,’ said Downe, with cheering
sympathy.
</p>
<p>
‘You have heard, then, of her last outbreak?’
</p>
<p>
Downe depressed his cheerfulness to its very reverse in a moment. ‘No, I
have not heard of anything serious,’ he said, with as long a face as one
naturally round could be turned into at short notice. ‘I only hear vague
reports of such things.’
</p>
<p>
‘You may think it will be all right,’ said Barnet drily. ‘But
I have a different opinion . . . No, Downe, we must look the thing in the face.
Not poppy nor mandragora—however, how are your wife and children?’
</p>
<p>
Downe said that they were all well, thanks; they were out that morning
somewhere; he was just looking to see if they were walking that way. Ah, there
they were, just coming down the street; and Downe pointed to the figures of two
children with a nursemaid, and a lady walking behind them.
</p>
<p>
‘You will come out and speak to her?’ he asked.
</p>
<p>
‘Not this morning. The fact is I don’t care to speak to anybody
just now.’
</p>
<p>
‘You are too sensitive, Mr. Barnet. At school I remember you used to get
as red as a rose if anybody uttered a word that hurt your feelings.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet mused. ‘Yes,’ he admitted, ‘there is a grain of truth
in that. It is because of that I often try to make peace at home. Life would be
tolerable then at any rate, even if not particularly bright.’
</p>
<p>
‘I have thought more than once of proposing a little plan to you,’
said Downe with some hesitation. ‘I don’t know whether it will meet
your views, but take it or leave it, as you choose. In fact, it was my wife who
suggested it: that she would be very glad to call on Mrs. Barnet and get into
her confidence. She seems to think that Mrs. Barnet is rather alone in the
town, and without advisers. Her impression is that your wife will listen to
reason. Emily has a wonderful way of winning the hearts of people of her own
sex.’
</p>
<p>
‘And of the other sex too, I think. She is a charming woman, and you were
a lucky fellow to find her.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, perhaps I was,’ simpered Downe, trying to wear an aspect of
being the last man in the world to feel pride. ‘However, she will be
likely to find out what ruffles Mrs. Barnet. Perhaps it is some
misunderstanding, you know—something that she is too proud to ask you to
explain, or some little thing in your conduct that irritates her because she
does not fully comprehend you. The truth is, Emily would have been more ready
to make advances if she had been quite sure of her fitness for Mrs.
Barnet’s society, who has of course been accustomed to London people of
good position, which made Emily fearful of intruding.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet expressed his warmest thanks for the well-intentioned proposition. There
was reason in Mrs. Downe’s fear—that he owned. ‘But do let
her call,’ he said. ‘There is no woman in England I would so soon
trust on such an errand. I am afraid there will not be any brilliant result;
still I shall take it as the kindest and nicest thing if she will try it, and
not be frightened at a repulse.’
</p>
<p>
When Barnet and Downe had parted, the former went to the Town Savings-Bank, of
which he was a trustee, and endeavoured to forget his troubles in the
contemplation of low sums of money, and figures in a network of red and blue
lines. He sat and watched the working-people making their deposits, to which at
intervals he signed his name. Before he left in the afternoon Downe put his
head inside the door.
</p>
<p>
‘Emily has seen Mrs. Barnet,’ he said, in a low voice. ‘She
has got Mrs. Barnet’s promise to take her for a drive down to the shore
to-morrow, if it is fine. Good afternoon!’
</p>
<p>
Barnet shook Downe by the hand without speaking, and Downe went away.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV</h3>
<p>
The next day was as fine as the arrangement could possibly require. As the sun
passed the meridian and declined westward, the tall shadows from the
scaffold-poles of Barnet’s rising residence streaked the ground as far as
to the middle of the highway. Barnet himself was there inspecting the progress
of the works for the first time during several weeks. A building in an
old-fashioned town five-and-thirty years ago did not, as in the modern fashion,
rise from the sod like a booth at a fair. The foundations and lower courses
were put in and allowed to settle for many weeks before the superstructure was
built up, and a whole summer of drying was hardly sufficient to do justice to
the important issues involved. Barnet stood within a window-niche which had as
yet received no frame, and thence looked down a slope into the road. The wheels
of a chaise were heard, and then his handsome Xantippe, in the company of Mrs.
Downe, drove past on their way to the shore. They were driving slowly; there
was a pleasing light in Mrs. Downe’s face, which seemed faintly to
reflect itself upon the countenance of her companion—that <i>politesse du
coeur</i> which was so natural to her having possibly begun already to work
results. But whatever the situation, Barnet resolved not to interfere, or do
anything to hazard the promise of the day. He might well afford to trust the
issue to another when he could never direct it but to ill himself. His
wife’s clenched rein-hand in its lemon-coloured glove, her stiff erect
figure, clad in velvet and lace, and her boldly-outlined face, passed on,
exhibiting their owner as one fixed for ever above the level of her
companion—socially by her early breeding, and materially by her higher
cushion.
</p>
<p>
Barnet decided to allow them a proper time to themselves, and then stroll down
to the shore and drive them home. After lingering on at the house for another
hour he started with this intention. A few hundred yards below
‘Château Ringdale’ stood the cottage in which the late
lieutenant’s daughter had her lodging. Barnet had not been so far that
way for a long time, and as he approached the forbidden ground a curious warmth
passed into him, which led him to perceive that, unless he were careful, he
might have to fight the battle with himself about Lucy over again. A tenth of
his present excuse would, however, have justified him in travelling by that
road to-day.
</p>
<p>
He came opposite the dwelling, and turned his eyes for a momentary glance into
the little garden that stretched from the palings to the door. Lucy was in the
enclosure; she was walking and stooping to gather some flowers, possibly for
the purpose of painting them, for she moved about quickly, as if anxious to
save time. She did not see him; he might have passed unnoticed; but a sensation
which was not in strict unison with his previous sentiments that day led him to
pause in his walk and watch her. She went nimbly round and round the beds of
anemones, tulips, jonquils, polyanthuses, and other old-fashioned flowers,
looking a very charming figure in her half-mourning bonnet, and with an
incomplete nosegay in her left hand. Raising herself to pull down a lilac
blossom she observed him.
</p>
<p>
‘Mr. Barnet!’ she said, innocently smiling. ‘Why, I have been
thinking of you many times since Mrs. Barnet went by in the pony-carriage, and
now here you are!’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, Lucy,’ he said.
</p>
<p>
Then she seemed to recall particulars of their last meeting, and he believed
that she flushed, though it might have been only the fancy of his own
supersensitivenesss.
</p>
<p>
‘I am going to the harbour,’ he added.
</p>
<p>
‘Are you?’ Lucy remarked simply. ‘A great many people begin
to go there now the summer is drawing on.’
</p>
<p>
Her face had come more into his view as she spoke, and he noticed how much
thinner and paler it was than when he had seen it last. ‘Lucy, how weary
you look! tell me, can I help you?’ he was going to cry
out.—‘If I do,’ he thought, ‘it will be the ruin of us
both!’ He merely said that the afternoon was fine, and went on his way.
</p>
<p>
As he went a sudden blast of air came over the hill as if in contradiction to
his words, and spoilt the previous quiet of the scene. The wind had already
shifted violently, and now smelt of the sea.
</p>
<p>
The harbour-road soon began to justify its name. A gap appeared in the rampart
of hills which shut out the sea, and on the left of the opening rose a vertical
cliff, coloured a burning orange by the sunlight, the companion cliff on the
right being livid in shade. Between these cliffs, like the Libyan bay which
sheltered the shipwrecked Trojans, was a little haven, seemingly a beginning
made by Nature herself of a perfect harbour, which appealed to the passer-by as
only requiring a little human industry to finish it and make it famous, the
ground on each side as far back as the daisied slopes that bounded the interior
valley being a mere layer of blown sand. But the Port-Bredy burgesses a mile
inland had, in the course of ten centuries, responded many times to that mute
appeal, with the result that the tides had invariably choked up their works
with sand and shingle as soon as completed. There were but few houses here: a
rough pier, a few boats, some stores, an inn, a residence or two, a ketch
unloading in the harbour, were the chief features of the settlement. On the
open ground by the shore stood his wife’s pony-carriage, empty, the boy
in attendance holding the horse.
</p>
<p>
When Barnet drew nearer, he saw an indigo-coloured spot moving swiftly along
beneath the radiant base of the eastern cliff, which proved to be a man in a
jersey, running with all his might. He held up his hand to Barnet, as it
seemed, and they approached each other. The man was local, but a stranger to
him.
</p>
<p>
‘What is it, my man?’ said Barnet.
</p>
<p>
‘A terrible calamity!’ the boatman hastily explained. Two ladies
had been capsized in a boat—they were Mrs. Downe and Mrs. Barnet of the
old town; they had driven down there that afternoon—they had alighted,
and it was so fine, that, after walking about a little while, they had been
tempted to go out for a short sail round the cliff. Just as they were putting
in to the shore, the wind shifted with a sudden gust, the boat listed over, and
it was thought they were both drowned. How it could have happened was beyond
his mind to fathom, for John Green knew how to sail a boat as well as any man
there.
</p>
<p>
‘Which is the way to the place?’ said Barnet.
</p>
<p>
It was just round the cliff.
</p>
<p>
‘Run to the carriage and tell the boy to bring it to the place as soon as
you can. Then go to the Harbour Inn and tell them to ride to town for a doctor.
Have they been got out of the water?’
</p>
<p>
‘One lady has.’
</p>
<p>
‘Which?’
</p>
<p>
‘Mrs. Barnet. Mrs. Downe, it is feared, has fleeted out to sea.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet ran on to that part of the shore which the cliff had hitherto obscured
from his view, and there discerned, a long way ahead, a group of fishermen
standing. As soon as he came up one or two recognized him, and, not liking to
meet his eye, turned aside with misgiving. He went amidst them and saw a small
sailing-boat lying draggled at the water’s edge; and, on the sloping
shingle beside it, a soaked and sandy woman’s form in the velvet dress
and yellow gloves of his wife.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER V</h3>
<p>
All had been done that could be done. Mrs. Barnet was in her own house under
medical hands, but the result was still uncertain. Barnet had acted as if
devotion to his wife were the dominant passion of his existence. There had been
much to decide—whether to attempt restoration of the apparently lifeless
body as it lay on the shore—whether to carry her to the Harbour
Inn—whether to drive with her at once to his own house. The first course,
with no skilled help or appliances near at hand, had seemed hopeless. The
second course would have occupied nearly as much time as a drive to the town,
owing to the intervening ridges of shingle, and the necessity of crossing the
harbour by boat to get to the house, added to which much time must have elapsed
before a doctor could have arrived down there. By bringing her home in the
carriage some precious moments had slipped by; but she had been laid in her own
bed in seven minutes, a doctor called to her side, and every possible
restorative brought to bear upon her.
</p>
<p>
At what a tearing pace he had driven up that road, through the yellow evening
sunlight, the shadows flapping irksomely into his eyes as each wayside object
rushed past between him and the west! Tired workmen with their baskets at their
backs had turned on their homeward journey to wonder at his speed. Halfway
between the shore and Port-Bredy town he had met Charlson, who had been the
first surgeon to hear of the accident. He was accompanied by his assistant in a
gig. Barnet had sent on the latter to the coast in case that Downe’s poor
wife should by that time have been reclaimed from the waves, and had brought
Charlson back with him to the house.
</p>
<p>
Barnet’s presence was not needed here, and he felt it to be his next duty
to set off at once and find Downe, that no other than himself might break the
news to him.
</p>
<p>
He was quite sure that no chance had been lost for Mrs. Downe by his leaving
the shore. By the time that Mrs. Barnet had been laid in the carriage, a much
larger group had assembled to lend assistance in finding her friend, rendering
his own help superfluous. But the duty of breaking the news was made doubly
painful by the circumstance that the catastrophe which had befallen Mrs. Downe
was solely the result of her own and her husband’s loving-kindness
towards himself.
</p>
<p>
He found Downe in his office. When the solicitor comprehended the intelligence
he turned pale, stood up, and remained for a moment perfectly still, as if
bereft of his faculties; then his shoulders heaved, he pulled out his
handkerchief and began to cry like a child. His sobs might have been heard in
the next room. He seemed to have no idea of going to the shore, or of doing
anything; but when Barnet took him gently by the hand and proposed to start at
once, he quietly acquiesced, neither uttering any further word nor making any
effort to repress his tears.
</p>
<p>
Barnet accompanied him to the shore, where, finding that no trace had as yet
been seen of Mrs. Downe, and that his stay would be of no avail, he left Downe
with his friends and the young doctor, and once more hastened back to his own
house.
</p>
<p>
At the door he met Charlson. ‘Well!’ Barnet said.
</p>
<p>
‘I have just come down,’ said the doctor; ‘we have done
everything, but without result. I sympathize with you in your
bereavement.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet did not much appreciate Charlson’s sympathy, which sounded to his
ears as something of a mockery from the lips of a man who knew what Charlson
knew about their domestic relations. Indeed there seemed an odd spark in
Charlson’s full black eye as he said the words; but that might have been
imaginary.
</p>
<p>
‘And, Mr. Barnet,’ Charlson resumed, ‘that little matter
between us—I hope to settle it finally in three weeks at least.’
</p>
<p>
‘Never mind that now,’ said Barnet abruptly. He directed the
surgeon to go to the harbour in case his services might even now be necessary
there: and himself entered the house.
</p>
<p>
The servants were coming from his wife’s chamber, looking helplessly at
each other and at him. He passed them by and entered the room, where he stood
mutely regarding the bed for a few minutes, after which he walked into his own
dressing-room adjoining, and there paced up and down. In a minute or two he
noticed what a strange and total silence had come over the upper part of the
house; his own movements, muffled as they were by the carpet, seemed noisy, and
his thoughts to disturb the air like articulate utterances. His eye glanced
through the window. Far down the road to the harbour a roof detained his gaze:
out of it rose a red chimney, and out of the red chimney a curl of smoke, as
from a fire newly kindled. He had often seen such a sight before. In that house
lived Lucy Savile; and the smoke was from the fire which was regularly lighted
at this time to make her tea.
</p>
<p>
After that he went back to the bedroom, and stood there some time regarding his
wife’s silent form. She was a woman some years older than himself, but
had not by any means overpassed the maturity of good looks and vigour. Her
passionate features, well-defined, firm, and statuesque in life, were doubly so
now: her mouth and brow, beneath her purplish black hair, showed only too
clearly that the turbulency of character which had made a bear-garden of his
house had been no temporary phase of her existence. While he reflected, he
suddenly said to himself, I wonder if all has been done?
</p>
<p>
The thought was led up to by his having fancied that his wife’s features
lacked in its complete form the expression which he had been accustomed to
associate with the faces of those whose spirits have fled for ever. The
effacement of life was not so marked but that, entering uninformed, he might
have supposed her sleeping. Her complexion was that seen in the numerous faded
portraits by Sir Joshua Reynolds; it was pallid in comparison with life, but
there was visible on a close inspection the remnant of what had once been a
flush; the keeping between the cheeks and the hollows of the face being thus
preserved, although positive colour was gone. Long orange rays of evening sun
stole in through chinks in the blind, striking on the large mirror, and being
thence reflected upon the crimson hangings and woodwork of the heavy bedstead,
so that the general tone of light was remarkably warm; and it was probable that
something might be due to this circumstance. Still the fact impressed him as
strange. Charlson had been gone more than a quarter of an hour: could it be
possible that he had left too soon, and that his attempts to restore her had
operated so sluggishly as only now to have made themselves felt? Barnet laid
his hand upon her chest, and fancied that ever and anon a faint flutter of
palpitation, gentle as that of a butterfly’s wing, disturbed the
stillness there—ceasing for a time, then struggling to go on, then
breaking down in weakness and ceasing again.
</p>
<p>
Barnet’s mother had been an active practitioner of the healing art among
her poorer neighbours, and her inspirations had all been derived from an octavo
volume of Domestic Medicine, which at this moment was lying, as it had lain for
many years, on a shelf in Barnet’s dressing-room. He hastily fetched it,
and there read under the head ‘Drowning:’-
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘Exertions for the recovery of any person who has not been immersed for a
longer period than half-an-hour should be continued for at least four hours, as
there have been many cases in which returning life has made itself visible even
after a longer interval.<br/>
    
‘Should, however, a weak action of any of the organs show itself when the
case seems almost hopeless, our efforts must be redoubled; the feeble spark in
this case requires to be solicited; it will certainly disappear under a
relaxation of labour.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet looked at his watch; it was now barely two hours and a half from the
time when he had first heard of the accident. He threw aside the book and
turned quickly to reach a stimulant which had previously been used. Pulling up
the blind for more light, his eye glanced out of the window. There he saw that
red chimney still smoking cheerily, and that roof, and through the roof that
somebody. His mechanical movements stopped, his hand remained on the
blind-cord, and he seemed to become breathless, as if he had suddenly found
himself treading a high rope.
</p>
<p>
While he stood a sparrow lighted on the windowsill, saw him, and flew away.
Next a man and a dog walked over one of the green hills which bulged above the
roofs of the town. But Barnet took no notice.
</p>
<p>
We may wonder what were the exact images that passed through his mind during
those minutes of gazing upon Lucy Savile’s house, the sparrow, the man
and the dog, and Lucy Savile’s house again. There are honest men who will
not admit to their thoughts, even as idle hypotheses, views of the future that
assume as done a deed which they would recoil from doing; and there are other
honest men for whom morality ends at the surface of their own heads, who will
deliberate what the first will not so much as suppose. Barnet had a wife whose
pretence distracted his home; she now lay as in death; by merely doing
nothing—by letting the intelligence which had gone forth to the world lie
undisturbed—he would effect such a deliverance for himself as he had
never hoped for, and open up an opportunity of which till now he had never
dreamed. Whether the conjuncture had arisen through any unscrupulous,
ill-considered impulse of Charlson to help out of a strait the friend who was
so kind as never to press him for what was due could not be told; there was
nothing to prove it; and it was a question which could never be asked. The
triangular situation—himself—his wife—Lucy Savile—was
the one clear thing.
</p>
<p>
From Barnet’s actions we may infer that he <i>supposed</i> such and such
a result, for a moment, but did not deliberate. He withdrew his hazel eyes from
the scene without, calmly turned, rang the bell for assistance, and vigorously
exerted himself to learn if life still lingered in that motionless frame. In a
short time another surgeon was in attendance; and then Barnet’s surmise
proved to be true. The slow life timidly heaved again; but much care and
patience were needed to catch and retain it, and a considerable period elapsed
before it could be said with certainty that Mrs. Barnet lived. When this was
the case, and there was no further room for doubt, Barnet left the chamber. The
blue evening smoke from Lucy’s chimney had died down to an imperceptible
stream, and as he walked about downstairs he murmured to himself, ‘My
wife was dead, and she is alive again.’
</p>
<p>
It was not so with Downe. After three hours’ immersion his wife’s
body had been recovered, life, of course, being quite extinct. Barnet on
descending, went straight to his friend’s house, and there learned the
result. Downe was helpless in his wild grief, occasionally even hysterical.
Barnet said little, but finding that some guiding hand was necessary in the
sorrow-stricken household, took upon him to supervise and manage till Downe
should be in a state of mind to do so for himself.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VI</h3>
<p>
One September evening, four months later, when Mrs. Barnet was in perfect
health, and Mrs. Downe but a weakening memory, an errand-boy paused to rest
himself in front of Mr. Barnet’s old house, depositing his basket on one
of the window-sills. The street was not yet lighted, but there were lights in
the house, and at intervals a flitting shadow fell upon the blind at his elbow.
Words also were audible from the same apartment, and they seemed to be those of
persons in violent altercation. But the boy could not gather their purport, and
he went on his way.
</p>
<p>
Ten minutes afterwards the door of Barnet’s house opened, and a tall
closely-veiled lady in a travelling-dress came out and descended the freestone
steps. The servant stood in the doorway watching her as she went with a
measured tread down the street. When she had been out of sight for some minutes
Barnet appeared at the door from within.
</p>
<p>
‘Did your mistress leave word where she was going?’ he asked.
</p>
<p>
‘No, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘Is the carriage ordered to meet her anywhere?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘Did she take a latch-key?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, sir.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet went in again, sat down in his chair, and leaned back. Then in solitude
and silence he brooded over the bitter emotions that filled his heart. It was
for this that he had gratuitously restored her to life, and made his union with
another impossible! The evening drew on, and nobody came to disturb him. At
bedtime he told the servants to retire, that he would sit up for Mrs. Barnet
himself; and when they were gone he leaned his head upon his hand and mused for
hours.
</p>
<p>
The clock struck one, two; still his wife came not, and, with impatience added
to depression, he went from room to room till another weary hour had passed.
This was not altogether a new experience for Barnet; but she had never before
so prolonged her absence. At last he sat down again and fell asleep.
</p>
<p>
He awoke at six o’clock to find that she had not returned. In searching
about the rooms he discovered that she had taken a case of jewels which had
been hers before her marriage. At eight a note was brought him; it was from his
wife, in which she stated that she had gone by the coach to the house of a
distant relative near London, and expressed a wish that certain boxes, articles
of clothing, and so on, might be sent to her forthwith. The note was brought to
him by a waiter at the Black-Bull Hotel, and had been written by Mrs. Barnet
immediately before she took her place in the stage.
</p>
<p>
By the evening this order was carried out, and Barnet, with a sense of relief,
walked out into the town. A fair had been held during the day, and the large
clear moon which rose over the most prominent hill flung its light upon the
booths and standings that still remained in the street, mixing its rays
curiously with those from the flaring naphtha lamps. The town was full of
country-people who had come in to enjoy themselves, and on this account Barnet
strolled through the streets unobserved. With a certain recklessness he made
for the harbour-road, and presently found himself by the shore, where he walked
on till he came to the spot near which his friend the kindly Mrs. Downe had
lost her life, and his own wife’s life had been preserved. A tremulous
pathway of bright moonshine now stretched over the water which had engulfed
them, and not a living soul was near.
</p>
<p>
Here he ruminated on their characters, and next on the young girl in whom he
now took a more sensitive interest than at the time when he had been free to
marry her. Nothing, so far as he was aware, had ever appeared in his own
conduct to show that such an interest existed. He had made it a point of the
utmost strictness to hinder that feeling from influencing in the faintest
degree his attitude towards his wife; and this was made all the more easy for
him by the small demand Mrs. Barnet made upon his attentions, for which she
ever evinced the greatest contempt; thus unwittingly giving him the
satisfaction of knowing that their severance owed nothing to jealousy, or,
indeed, to any personal behaviour of his at all. Her concern was not with him
or his feelings, as she frequently told him; but that she had, in a moment of
weakness, thrown herself away upon a common burgher when she might have aimed
at, and possibly brought down, a peer of the realm. Her frequent depreciation
of Barnet in these terms had at times been so intense that he was sorely
tempted to retaliate on her egotism by owning that he loved at the same low
level on which he lived; but prudence had prevailed, for which he was now
thankful.
</p>
<p>
Something seemed to sound upon the shingle behind him over and above the raking
of the wave. He looked round, and a slight girlish shape appeared quite close
to him, He could not see her face because it was in the direction of the moon.
</p>
<p>
‘Mr. Barnet?’ the rambler said, in timid surprise. The voice was
the voice of Lucy Savile.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said Barnet. ‘How can I repay you for this
pleasure?’
</p>
<p>
‘I only came because the night was so clear. I am now on my way
home.’
</p>
<p>
‘I am glad we have met. I want to know if you will let me do something
for you, to give me an occupation, as an idle man? I am sure I ought to help
you, for I know you are almost without friends.’
</p>
<p>
She hesitated. ‘Why should you tell me that?’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘In the hope that you will be frank with me.’
</p>
<p>
‘I am not altogether without friends here. But I am going to make a
little change in my life—to go out as a teacher of freehand drawing and
practical perspective, of course I mean on a comparatively humble scale,
because I have not been specially educated for that profession. But I am sure I
shall like it much.’
</p>
<p>
‘You have an opening?’
</p>
<p>
‘I have not exactly got it, but I have advertised for one.’
</p>
<p>
‘Lucy, you must let me help you!’
</p>
<p>
‘Not at all.’
</p>
<p>
‘You need not think it would compromise you, or that I am indifferent to
delicacy. I bear in mind how we stand. It is very unlikely that you will
succeed as teacher of the class you mention, so let me do something of a
different kind for you. Say what you would like, and it shall be done.’
</p>
<p>
‘No; if I can’t be a drawing-mistress or governess, or something of
that sort, I shall go to India and join my brother.’
</p>
<p>
‘I wish I could go abroad, anywhere, everywhere with you, Lucy, and leave
this place and its associations for ever!’
</p>
<p>
She played with the end of her bonnet-string, and hastily turned aside.
‘Don’t ever touch upon that kind of topic again,’ she said,
with a quick severity not free from anger. ‘It simply makes it impossible
for me to see you, much less receive any guidance from you. No, thank you, Mr.
Barnet; you can do nothing for me at present; and as I suppose my uncertainty
will end in my leaving for India, I fear you never will. If ever I think you
<i>can</i> do anything, I will take the trouble to ask you. Till then,
good-bye.’
</p>
<p>
The tone of her latter words was equivocal, and while he remained in doubt
whether a gentle irony was or was not inwrought with their sound, she swept
lightly round and left him alone. He saw her form get smaller and smaller along
the damp belt of sea-sand between ebb and flood; and when she had vanished
round the cliff into the harbour-road, he himself followed in the same
direction.
</p>
<p>
That her hopes from an advertisement should be the single thread which held
Lucy Savile in England was too much for Barnet. On reaching the town he went
straight to the residence of Downe, now a widower with four children. The young
motherless brood had been sent to bed about a quarter of an hour earlier, and
when Barnet entered he found Downe sitting alone. It was the same room as that
from which the family had been looking out for Downe at the beginning of the
year, when Downe had slipped into the gutter and his wife had been so enviably
tender towards him. The old neatness had gone from the house; articles lay in
places which could show no reason for their presence, as if momentarily
deposited there some months ago, and forgotten ever since; there were no
flowers; things were jumbled together on the furniture which should have been
in cupboards; and the place in general had that stagnant, unrenovated air which
usually pervades the maimed home of the widower.
</p>
<p>
Downe soon renewed his customary full-worded lament over his wife, and even
when he had worked himself up to tears, went on volubly, as if a listener were
a luxury to be enjoyed whenever he could be caught.
</p>
<p>
‘She was a treasure beyond compare, Mr. Barnet! I shall never see such
another. Nobody now to nurse me—nobody to console me in those daily
troubles, you know, Barnet, which make consolation so necessary to a nature
like mine. It would be unbecoming to repine, for her spirit’s home was
elsewhere—the tender light in her eyes always showed it; but it is a long
dreary time that I have before me, and nobody else can ever fill the void left
in my heart by her loss—nobody—nobody!’ And Downe wiped his
eyes again.
</p>
<p>
‘She was a good woman in the highest sense,’ gravely answered
Barnet, who, though Downe’s words drew genuine compassion from his heart,
could not help feeling that a tender reticence would have been a finer tribute
to Mrs. Downe’s really sterling virtues than such a second-class lament
as this.
</p>
<p>
‘I have something to show you,’ Downe resumed, producing from a
drawer a sheet of paper on which was an elaborate design for a canopied tomb.
‘This has been sent me by the architect, but it is not exactly what I
want.’
</p>
<p>
‘You have got Jones to do it, I see, the man who is carrying out my
house,’ said Barnet, as he glanced at the signature to the drawing.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, but it is not quite what I want. I want something more
striking—more like a tomb I have seen in St. Paul’s Cathedral.
Nothing less will do justice to my feelings, and how far short of them that
will fall!’
</p>
<p>
Barnet privately thought the design a sufficiently imposing one as it stood,
even extravagantly ornate; but, feeling that he had no right to criticize, he
said gently, ‘Downe, should you not live more in your children’s
lives at the present time, and soften the sharpness of regret for your own past
by thinking of their future?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes; but what can I do more?’ asked Downe, wrinkling his
forehead hopelessly.
</p>
<p>
It was with anxious slowness that Barnet produced his reply—the secret
object of his visit to-night. ‘Did you not say one day that you ought by
rights to get a governess for the children?’
</p>
<p>
Downe admitted that he had said so, but that he could not see his way to it.
‘The kind of woman I should like to have,’ he said, ‘would be
rather beyond my means. No; I think I shall send them to school in the town
when they are old enough to go out alone.’
</p>
<p>
‘Now, I know of something better than that. The late Lieutenant
Savile’s daughter, Lucy, wants to do something for herself in the way of
teaching. She would be inexpensive, and would answer your purpose as well as
anybody for six or twelve months. She would probably come daily if you were to
ask her, and so your housekeeping arrangements would not be much
affected.’
</p>
<p>
‘I thought she had gone away,’ said the solicitor, musing.
‘Where does she live?’
</p>
<p>
Barnet told him, and added that, if Downe should think of her as suitable, he
would do well to call as soon as possible, or she might be on the wing.
‘If you do see her,’ he said, ‘it would be advisable not to
mention my name. She is rather stiff in her ideas of me, and it might prejudice
her against a course if she knew that I recommended it.’
</p>
<p>
Downe promised to give the subject his consideration, and nothing more was said
about it just then. But when Barnet rose to go, which was not till nearly
bedtime, he reminded Downe of the suggestion and went up the street to his own
solitary home with a sense of satisfaction at his promising diplomacy in a
charitable cause.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VII</h3>
<p>
The walls of his new house were carried up nearly to their full height. By a
curious though not infrequent reaction, Barnet’s feelings about that
unnecessary structure had undergone a change; he took considerable interest in
its progress as a long-neglected thing, his wife before her departure having
grown quite weary of it as a hobby. Moreover, it was an excellent distraction
for a man in the unhappy position of having to live in a provincial town with
nothing to do. He was probably the first of his line who had ever passed a day
without toil, and perhaps something like an inherited instinct disqualifies
such men for a life of pleasant inaction, such as lies in the power of those
whose leisure is not a personal accident, but a vast historical accretion which
has become part of their natures.
</p>
<p>
Thus Barnet got into a way of spending many of his leisure hours on the site of
the new building, and he might have been seen on most days at this time trying
the temper of the mortar by punching the joints with his stick, looking at the
grain of a floor-board, and meditating where it grew, or picturing under what
circumstances the last fire would be kindled in the at present sootless
chimneys. One day when thus occupied he saw three children pass by in the
company of a fair young woman, whose sudden appearance caused him to flush
perceptibly.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, she is there,’ he thought. ‘That’s a blessed
thing.’
</p>
<p>
Casting an interested glance over the rising building and the busy workmen,
Lucy Savile and the little Downes passed by; and after that time it became a
regular though almost unconscious custom of Barnet to stand in the
half-completed house and look from the ungarnished windows at the governess as
she tripped towards the sea-shore with her young charges, which she was in the
habit of doing on most fine afternoons. It was on one of these occasions, when
he had been loitering on the first-floor landing, near the hole left for the
staircase, not yet erected, that there appeared above the edge of the floor a
little hat, followed by a little head.
</p>
<p>
Barnet withdrew through a doorway, and the child came to the top of the ladder,
stepping on to the floor and crying to her sisters and Miss Savile to follow.
Another head rose above the floor, and another, and then Lucy herself came into
view. The troop ran hither and thither through the empty, shaving-strewn rooms,
and Barnet came forward.
</p>
<p>
Lucy uttered a small exclamation: she was very sorry that she had intruded; she
had not the least idea that Mr. Barnet was there: the children had come up, and
she had followed.
</p>
<p>
Barnet replied that he was only too glad to see them there. ‘And now, let
me show you the rooms,’ he said.
</p>
<p>
She passively assented, and he took her round. There was not much to show in
such a bare skeleton of a house, but he made the most of it, and explained the
different ornamental fittings that were soon to be fixed here and there. Lucy
made but few remarks in reply, though she seemed pleased with her visit, and
stole away down the ladder, followed by her companions.
</p>
<p>
After this the new residence became yet more of a hobby for Barnet.
Downe’s children did not forget their first visit, and when the windows
were glazed, and the handsome staircase spread its broad low steps into the
hall, they came again, prancing in unwearied succession through every room from
ground-floor to attics, while Lucy stood waiting for them at the door. Barnet,
who rarely missed a day in coming to inspect progress, stepped out from the
drawing-room.
</p>
<p>
‘I could not keep them out,’ she said, with an apologetic blush.
‘I tried to do so very much: but they are rather wilful, and we are
directed to walk this way for the sea air.’
</p>
<p>
‘Do let them make the house their regular playground, and you
yours,’ said Barnet. ‘There is no better place for children to romp
and take their exercise in than an empty house, particularly in muddy or damp
weather such as we shall get a good deal of now; and this place will not be
furnished for a long long time—perhaps never. I am not at all decided
about it.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, but it must!’ replied Lucy, looking round at the hall.
‘The rooms are excellent, twice as high as ours; and the views from the
windows are so lovely.’
</p>
<p>
‘I daresay, I daresay,’ he said absently.
</p>
<p>
‘Will all the furniture be new?’ she asked.
</p>
<p>
‘All the furniture be new—that’s a thing I have not thought
of. In fact I only come here and look on. My father’s house would have
been large enough for me, but another person had a voice in the matter, and it
was settled that we should build. However, the place grows upon me; its recent
associations are cheerful, and I am getting to like it fast.’
</p>
<p>
A certain uneasiness in Lucy’s manner showed that the conversation was
taking too personal a turn for her. ‘Still, as modern tastes develop,
people require more room to gratify them in,’ she said, withdrawing to
call the children; and serenely bidding him good afternoon she went on her way.
</p>
<p>
Barnet’s life at this period was singularly lonely, and yet he was
happier than he could have expected. His wife’s estrangement and absence,
which promised to be permanent, left him free as a boy in his movements, and
the solitary walks that he took gave him ample opportunity for chastened
reflection on what might have been his lot if he had only shown wisdom enough
to claim Lucy Savile when there was no bar between their lives, and she was to
be had for the asking. He would occasionally call at the house of his friend
Downe; but there was scarcely enough in common between their two natures to
make them more than friends of that excellent sort whose personal knowledge of
each other’s history and character is always in excess of intimacy,
whereby they are not so likely to be severed by a clash of sentiment as in
cases where intimacy springs up in excess of knowledge. Lucy was never visible
at these times, being either engaged in the school-room, or in taking an airing
out of doors; but, knowing that she was now comfortable, and had given up the,
to him, depressing idea of going off to the other side of the globe, he was
quite content.
</p>
<p>
The new house had so far progressed that the gardeners were beginning to grass
down the front. During an afternoon which he was passing in marking the curve
for the carriage-drive, he beheld her coming in boldly towards him from the
road. Hitherto Barnet had only caught her on the premises by stealth; and this
advance seemed to show that at last her reserve had broken down.
</p>
<p>
A smile gained strength upon her face as she approached, and it was quite
radiant when she came up, and said, without a trace of embarrassment, ‘I
find I owe you a hundred thanks—and it comes to me quite as a surprise!
It was through your kindness that I was engaged by Mr. Downe. Believe me, Mr.
Barnet, I did not know it until yesterday, or I should have thanked you long
and long ago!’
</p>
<p>
‘I had offended you—just a trifle—at the time, I
think?’ said Barnet, smiling, ‘and it was best that you should not
know.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes,’ she returned hastily. ‘Don’t allude to
that; it is past and over, and we will let it be. The house is finished almost,
is it not? How beautiful it will look when the evergreens are grown! Do you
call the style Palladian, Mr. Barnet?’
</p>
<p>
‘I—really don’t quite know what it is. Yes, it must be
Palladian, certainly. But I’ll ask Jones, the architect; for, to tell the
truth, I had not thought much about the style: I had nothing to do with
choosing it, I am sorry to say.’
</p>
<p>
She would not let him harp on this gloomy refrain, and talked on bright matters
till she said, producing a small roll of paper which he had noticed in her hand
all the while, ‘Mr. Downe wished me to bring you this revised drawing of
the late Mrs. Downe’s tomb, which the architect has just sent him. He
would like you to look it over.’
</p>
<p>
The children came up with their hoops, and she went off with them down the
harbour-road as usual. Barnet had been glad to get those words of thanks; he
had been thinking for many months that he would like her to know of his share
in finding her a home such as it was; and what he could not do for himself,
Downe had now kindly done for him. He returned to his desolate house with a
lighter tread; though in reason he hardly knew why his tread should be light.
</p>
<p>
On examining the drawing, Barnet found that, instead of the vast altar-tomb and
canopy Downe had determined on at their last meeting, it was to be a more
modest memorial even than had been suggested by the architect; a coped tomb of
good solid construction, with no useless elaboration at all. Barnet was truly
glad to see that Downe had come to reason of his own accord; and he returned
the drawing with a note of approval.
</p>
<p>
He followed up the house-work as before, and as he walked up and down the
rooms, occasionally gazing from the windows over the bulging green hills and
the quiet harbour that lay between them, he murmured words and fragments of
words, which, if listened to, would have revealed all the secrets of his
existence. Whatever his reason in going there, Lucy did not call again: the
walk to the shore seemed to be abandoned: he must have thought it as well for
both that it should be so, for he did not go anywhere out of his accustomed
ways to endeavour to discover her.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VIII</h3>
<p>
The winter and the spring had passed, and the house was complete. It was a fine
morning in the early part of June, and Barnet, though not in the habit of
rising early, had taken a long walk before breakfast; returning by way of the
new building. A sufficiently exciting cause of his restlessness to-day might
have been the intelligence which had reached him the night before, that Lucy
Savile was going to India after all, and notwithstanding the representations of
her friends that such a journey was unadvisable in many ways for an unpractised
girl, unless some more definite advantage lay at the end of it than she could
show to be the case. Barnet’s walk up the slope to the building betrayed
that he was in a dissatisfied mood. He hardly saw that the dewy time of day
lent an unusual freshness to the bushes and trees which had so recently put on
their summer habit of heavy leafage, and made his newly-laid lawn look as well
established as an old manorial meadow. The house had been so adroitly placed
between six tall elms which were growing on the site beforehand, that they
seemed like real ancestral trees; and the rooks, young and old, cawed
melodiously to their visitor.
</p>
<p>
The door was not locked, and he entered. No workmen appeared to be present, and
he walked from sunny window to sunny window of the empty rooms, with a sense of
seclusion which might have been very pleasant but for the antecedent knowledge
that his almost paternal care of Lucy Savile was to be thrown away by her
wilfulness. Footsteps echoed through an adjoining room; and bending his eyes in
that direction, he perceived Mr. Jones, the architect. He had come to look over
the building before giving the contractor his final certificate. They walked
over the house together. Everything was finished except the papering: there
were the latest improvements of the period in bell-hanging, ventilating,
smoke-jacks, fire-grates, and French windows. The business was soon ended, and
Jones, having directed Barnet’s attention to a roll of wall-paper
patterns which lay on a bench for his choice, was leaving to keep another
engagement, when Barnet said, ‘Is the tomb finished yet for Mrs.
Downe?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well—yes: it is at last,’ said the architect, coming back
and speaking as if he were in a mood to make a confidence. ‘I have had no
end of trouble in the matter, and, to tell the truth, I am heartily glad it is
over.’
</p>
<p>
Barnet expressed his surprise. ‘I thought poor Downe had given up those
extravagant notions of his? then he has gone back to the altar and canopy after
all? Well, he is to be excused, poor fellow!’
</p>
<p>
‘O no—he has not at all gone back to them—quite the
reverse,’ Jones hastened to say. ‘He has so reduced design after
design, that the whole thing has been nothing but waste labour for me; till in
the end it has become a common headstone, which a mason put up in half a
day.’
</p>
<p>
‘A common headstone?’ said Barnet.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes. I held out for some time for the addition of a footstone at least.
But he said, “O no—he couldn’t afford it.”’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, well—his family is growing up, poor fellow, and his expenses
are getting serious.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, exactly,’ said Jones, as if the subject were none of his. And
again directing Barnet’s attention to the wall-papers, the bustling
architect left him to keep some other engagement.
</p>
<p>
‘A common headstone,’ murmured Barnet, left again to himself. He
mused a minute or two, and next began looking over and selecting from the
patterns; but had not long been engaged in the work when he heard another
footstep on the gravel without, and somebody enter the open porch.
</p>
<p>
Barnet went to the door—it was his manservant in search of him.
</p>
<p>
‘I have been trying for some time to find you, sir,’ he said.
‘This letter has come by the post, and it is marked immediate. And
there’s this one from Mr. Downe, who called just now wanting to see
you.’ He searched his pocket for the second.
</p>
<p>
Barnet took the first letter—it had a black border, and bore the London
postmark. It was not in his wife’s handwriting, or in that of any person
he knew; but conjecture soon ceased as he read the page, wherein he was briefly
informed that Mrs. Barnet had died suddenly on the previous day, at the
furnished villa she had occupied near London.
</p>
<p>
Barnet looked vaguely round the empty hall, at the blank walls, out of the
doorway. Drawing a long palpitating breath, and with eyes downcast, he turned
and climbed the stairs slowly, like a man who doubted their stability. The fact
of his wife having, as it were, died once already, and lived on again, had
entirely dislodged the possibility of her actual death from his conjecture. He
went to the landing, leant over the balusters, and after a reverie, of whose
duration he had but the faintest notion, turned to the window and stretched his
gaze to the cottage further down the road, which was visible from his landing,
and from which Lucy still walked to the solicitor’s house by a cross
path. The faint words that came from his moving lips were simply, ‘At
last!’
</p>
<p>
Then, almost involuntarily, Barnet fell down on his knees and murmured some
incoherent words of thanksgiving. Surely his virtue in restoring his wife to
life had been rewarded! But, as if the impulse struck uneasily on his
conscience, he quickly rose, brushed the dust from his trousers and set himself
to think of his next movements. He could not start for London for some hours;
and as he had no preparations to make that could not be made in half-an-hour,
he mechanically descended and resumed his occupation of turning over the
wall-papers. They had all got brighter for him, those papers. It was all
changed—who would sit in the rooms that they were to line? He went on to
muse upon Lucy’s conduct in so frequently coming to the house with the
children; her occasional blush in speaking to him; her evident interest in him.
What woman can in the long run avoid being interested in a man whom she knows
to be devoted to her? If human solicitation could ever effect anything, there
should be no going to India for Lucy now. All the papers previously chosen
seemed wrong in their shades, and he began from the beginning to choose again.
</p>
<p>
While entering on the task he heard a forced ‘Ahem!’ from without
the porch, evidently uttered to attract his attention, and footsteps again
advancing to the door. His man, whom he had quite forgotten in his mental
turmoil, was still waiting there.
</p>
<p>
‘I beg your pardon, sir,’ the man said from round the doorway;
‘but here’s the note from Mr. Downe that you didn’t take. He
called just after you went out, and as he couldn’t wait, he wrote this on
your study-table.’
</p>
<p>
He handed in the letter—no black-bordered one now, but a
practical-looking note in the well-known writing of the solicitor.
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘DEAR BARNET’—it ran—‘Perhaps you will be
prepared for the information I am about to give—that Lucy Savile and
myself are going to be married this morning. I have hitherto said nothing as to
my intention to any of my friends, for reasons which I am sure you will fully
appreciate. The crisis has been brought about by her expressing her intention
to join her brother in India. I then discovered that I could not do without
her.<br/>
    
‘It is to be quite a private wedding; but it is my particular wish that
you come down here quietly at ten, and go to church with us; it will add
greatly to the pleasure I shall experience in the ceremony, and, I believe, to
Lucy’s also. I have called on you very early to make the request, in the
belief that I should find you at home; but you are beforehand with me in your
early rising.—Yours sincerely, C. Downe.’
</p>
<p>
‘Need I wait, sir?’ said the servant after a dead silence.
</p>
<p>
‘That will do, William. No answer,’ said Barnet calmly.
</p>
<p>
When the man had gone Barnet re-read the letter. Turning eventually to the
wall-papers, which he had been at such pains to select, he deliberately tore
them into halves and quarters, and threw them into the empty fireplace. Then he
went out of the house; locked the door, and stood in the front awhile. Instead
of returning into the town, he went down the harbour-road and thoughtfully
lingered about by the sea, near the spot where the body of Downe’s late
wife had been found and brought ashore.
</p>
<p>
Barnet was a man with a rich capacity for misery, and there is no doubt that he
exercised it to its fullest extent now. The events that had, as it were, dashed
themselves together into one half-hour of this day showed that curious
refinement of cruelty in their arrangement which often proceeds from the bosom
of the whimsical god at other times known as blind Circumstance. That his few
minutes of hope, between the reading of the first and second letters, had
carried him to extraordinary heights of rapture was proved by the immensity of
his suffering now. The sun blazing into his face would have shown a close
watcher that a horizontal line, which he had never noticed before, but which
was never to be gone thereafter, was somehow gradually forming itself in the
smooth of his forehead. His eyes, of a light hazel, had a curious look which
can only be described by the word bruised; the sorrow that looked from them
being largely mixed with the surprise of a man taken unawares.
</p>
<p>
The secondary particulars of his present position, too, were odd enough, though
for some time they appeared to engage little of his attention. Not a soul in
the town knew, as yet, of his wife’s death; and he almost owed Downe the
kindness of not publishing it till the day was over: the conjuncture, taken
with that which had accompanied the death of Mrs. Downe, being so singular as
to be quite sufficient to darken the pleasure of the impressionable solicitor
to a cruel extent, if made known to him. But as Barnet could not set out on his
journey to London, where his wife lay, for some hours (there being at this date
no railway within a distance of many miles), no great reason existed why he
should leave the town.
</p>
<p>
Impulse in all its forms characterized Barnet, and when he heard the distant
clock strike the hour of ten his feet began to carry him up the harbour-road
with the manner of a man who must do something to bring himself to life. He
passed Lucy Savile’s old house, his own new one, and came in view of the
church. Now he gave a perceptible start, and his mechanical condition went
away. Before the church-gate were a couple of carriages, and Barnet then could
perceive that the marriage between Downe and Lucy was at that moment being
solemnized within. A feeling of sudden, proud self-confidence, an indocile wish
to walk unmoved in spite of grim environments, plainly possessed him, and when
he reached the wicket-gate he turned in without apparent effort. Pacing up the
paved footway he entered the church and stood for a while in the nave passage.
A group of people was standing round the vestry door; Barnet advanced through
these and stepped into the vestry.
</p>
<p>
There they were, busily signing their names. Seeing Downe about to look round,
Barnet averted his somewhat disturbed face for a second or two; when he turned
again front to front he was calm and quite smiling; it was a creditable triumph
over himself, and deserved to be remembered in his native town. He greeted
Downe heartily, offering his congratulations.
</p>
<p>
It seemed as if Barnet expected a half-guilty look upon Lucy’s face; but
no, save the natural flush and flurry engendered by the service just performed,
there was nothing whatever in her bearing which showed a disturbed mind: her
gray-brown eyes carried in them now as at other times the well-known expression
of common-sensed rectitude which never went so far as to touch on hardness. She
shook hands with him, and Downe said warmly, ‘I wish you could have come
sooner: I called on purpose to ask you. You’ll drive back with us
now?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, no,’ said Barnet; ‘I am not at all prepared; but I
thought I would look in upon you for a moment, even though I had not time to go
home and dress. I’ll stand back and see you pass out, and observe the
effect of the spectacle upon myself as one of the public.’
</p>
<p>
Then Lucy and her husband laughed, and Barnet laughed and retired; and the
quiet little party went gliding down the nave and towards the porch,
Lucy’s new silk dress sweeping with a smart rustle round the
base-mouldings of the ancient font, and Downe’s little daughters
following in a state of round-eyed interest in their position, and that of
Lucy, their teacher and friend.
</p>
<p>
So Downe was comforted after his Emily’s death, which had taken place
twelve months, two weeks, and three days before that time.
</p>
<p>
When the two flys had driven off and the spectators had vanished, Barnet
followed to the door, and went out into the sun. He took no more trouble to
preserve a spruce exterior; his step was unequal, hesitating, almost
convulsive; and the slight changes of colour which went on in his face seemed
refracted from some inward flame. In the churchyard he became pale as a summer
cloud, and finding it not easy to proceed he sat down on one of the tombstones
and supported his head with his hand.
</p>
<p>
Hard by was a sexton filling up a grave which he had not found time to finish
on the previous evening. Observing Barnet, he went up to him, and recognizing
him, said, ‘Shall I help you home, sir?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no, thank you,’ said Barnet, rousing himself and standing up.
The sexton returned to his grave, followed by Barnet, who, after watching him
awhile, stepped into the grave, now nearly filled, and helped to tread in the
earth.
</p>
<p>
The sexton apparently thought his conduct a little singular, but he made no
observation, and when the grave was full, Barnet suddenly stopped, looked far
away, and with a decided step proceeded to the gate and vanished. The sexton
rested on his shovel and looked after him for a few moments, and then began
banking up the mound.
</p>
<p>
In those short minutes of treading in the dead man Barnet had formed a design,
but what it was the inhabitants of that town did not for some long time
imagine. He went home, wrote several letters of business, called on his lawyer,
an old man of the same place who had been the legal adviser of Barnet’s
father before him, and during the evening overhauled a large quantity of
letters and other documents in his possession. By eleven o’clock the heap
of papers in and before Barnet’s grate had reached formidable dimensions,
and he began to burn them. This, owing to their quantity, it was not so easy to
do as he had expected, and he sat long into the night to complete the task.
</p>
<p>
The next morning Barnet departed for London, leaving a note for Downe to inform
him of Mrs. Barnet’s sudden death, and that he was gone to bury her; but
when a thrice-sufficient time for that purpose had elapsed, he was not seen
again in his accustomed walks, or in his new house, or in his old one. He was
gone for good, nobody knew whither. It was soon discovered that he had
empowered his lawyer to dispose of all his property, real and personal, in the
borough, and pay in the proceeds to the account of an unknown person at one of
the large London banks. The person was by some supposed to be himself under an
assumed name; but few, if any, had certain knowledge of that fact.
</p>
<p>
The elegant new residence was sold with the rest of his possessions; and its
purchaser was no other than Downe, now a thriving man in the borough, and one
whose growing family and new wife required more roomy accommodation than was
afforded by the little house up the narrow side street. Barnet’s old
habitation was bought by the trustees of the Congregational Baptist body in
that town, who pulled down the time-honoured dwelling and built a new chapel on
its site. By the time the last hour of that, to Barnet, eventful year had
chimed, every vestige of him had disappeared from the precincts of his native
place, and the name became extinct in the borough of Port-Bredy, after having
been a living force therein for more than two hundred years.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IX</h3>
<p>
Twenty-one years and six months do not pass without setting a mark even upon
durable stone and triple brass; upon humanity such a period works nothing less
than transformation. In Barnet’s old birthplace vivacious young children
with bones like india-rubber had grown up to be stable men and women, men and
women had dried in the skin, stiffened, withered, and sunk into decrepitude;
while selections from every class had been consigned to the outlying cemetery.
Of inorganic differences the greatest was that a railway had invaded the town,
tying it on to a main line at a junction a dozen miles off. Barnet’s
house on the harbour-road, once so insistently new, had acquired a respectable
mellowness, with ivy, Virginia creepers, lichens, damp patches, and even
constitutional infirmities of its own like its elder fellows. Its architecture,
once so very improved and modern, had already become stale in style, without
having reached the dignity of being old-fashioned. Trees about the harbour-road
had increased in circumference or disappeared under the saw; while the church
had had such a tremendous practical joke played upon it by some facetious
restorer or other as to be scarce recognizable by its dearest old friends.
</p>
<p>
During this long interval George Barnet had never once been seen or heard of in
the town of his fathers.
</p>
<p>
It was the evening of a market-day, and some half-dozen middle-aged farmers and
dairymen were lounging round the bar of the Black-Bull Hotel, occasionally
dropping a remark to each other, and less frequently to the two barmaids who
stood within the pewter-topped counter in a perfunctory attitude of attention,
these latter sighing and making a private observation to one another at odd
intervals, on more interesting experiences than the present.
</p>
<p>
‘Days get shorter,’ said one of the dairymen, as he looked towards
the street, and noticed that the lamp-lighter was passing by.
</p>
<p>
The farmers merely acknowledged by their countenances the propriety of this
remark, and finding that nobody else spoke, one of the barmaids said
‘yes,’ in a tone of painful duty.
</p>
<p>
‘Come fair-day we shall have to light up before we start for
home-along.’
</p>
<p>
‘That’s true,’ his neighbour conceded, with a gaze of
blankness.
</p>
<p>
‘And after that we shan’t see much further difference all’s
winter.’
</p>
<p>
The rest were not unwilling to go even so far as this.
</p>
<p>
The barmaid sighed again, and raised one of her hands from the counter on which
they rested to scratch the smallest surface of her face with the smallest of
her fingers. She looked towards the door, and presently remarked, ‘I
think I hear the ‘bus coming in from station.’
</p>
<p>
The eyes of the dairymen and farmers turned to the glass door dividing the hall
from the porch, and in a minute or two the omnibus drew up outside. Then there
was a lumbering down of luggage, and then a man came into the hall, followed by
a porter with a portmanteau on his poll, which he deposited on a bench.
</p>
<p>
The stranger was an elderly person, with curly ashen white hair, a
deeply-creviced outer corner to each eyelid, and a countenance baked by
innumerable suns to the colour of terra-cotta, its hue and that of his hair
contrasting like heat and cold respectively. He walked meditatively and gently,
like one who was fearful of disturbing his own mental equilibrium. But whatever
lay at the bottom of his breast had evidently made him so accustomed to its
situation there that it caused him little practical inconvenience.
</p>
<p>
He paused in silence while, with his dubious eyes fixed on the barmaids, he
seemed to consider himself. In a moment or two he addressed them, and asked to
be accommodated for the night. As he waited he looked curiously round the hall,
but said nothing. As soon as invited he disappeared up the staircase, preceded
by a chambermaid and candle, and followed by a lad with his trunk. Not a soul
had recognized him.
</p>
<p>
A quarter of an hour later, when the farmers and dairymen had driven off to
their homesteads in the country, he came downstairs, took a biscuit and one
glass of wine, and walked out into the town, where the radiance from the
shop-windows had grown so in volume of late years as to flood with cheerfulness
every standing cart, barrow, stall, and idler that occupied the wayside,
whether shabby or genteel. His chief interest at present seemed to lie in the
names painted over the shop-fronts and on door-ways, as far as they were
visible; these now differed to an ominous extent from what they had been
one-and-twenty years before.
</p>
<p>
The traveller passed on till he came to the bookseller’s, where he looked
in through the glass door. A fresh-faced young man was standing behind the
counter, otherwise the shop was empty. The gray-haired observer entered, asked
for some periodical by way of paying for admission, and with his elbow on the
counter began to turn over the pages he had bought, though that he read nothing
was obvious.
</p>
<p>
At length he said, ‘Is old Mr. Watkins still alive?’ in a voice
which had a curious youthful cadence in it even now.
</p>
<p>
‘My father is dead, sir,’ said the young man.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, I am sorry to hear it,’ said the stranger. ‘But it is so
many years since I last visited this town that I could hardly expect it should
be otherwise.’ After a short silence he continued—‘And is the
firm of Barnet, Browse, and Company still in existence?<i>—</i>they used
to be large flax-merchants and twine-spinners here?’
</p>
<p>
‘The firm is still going on, sir, but they have dropped the name of
Barnet. I believe that was a sort of fancy name—at least, I never knew of
any living Barnet. ’Tis now Browse and Co.’
</p>
<p>
‘And does Andrew Jones still keep on as architect?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s dead, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘And the Vicar of St. Mary’s—Mr. Melrose?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s been dead a great many years.’
</p>
<p>
‘Dear me!’ He paused yet longer, and cleared his voice. ‘Is
Mr. Downe, the solicitor, still in practice?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, sir, he’s dead. He died about seven years ago.’
</p>
<p>
Here it was a longer silence still; and an attentive observer would have
noticed that the paper in the stranger’s hand increased its imperceptible
tremor to a visible shake. That gray-haired gentleman noticed it himself, and
rested the paper on the counter. ‘Is <i>Mrs</i>. Downe still
alive?’ he asked, closing his lips firmly as soon as the words were out
of his mouth, and dropping his eyes.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, sir, she’s alive and well. She’s living at the old
place.’
</p>
<p>
‘In East Street?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no; at Château Ringdale. I believe it has been in the family for
some generations.’
</p>
<p>
‘She lives with her children, perhaps?’
</p>
<p>
‘No; she has no children of her own. There were some Miss Downes; I think
they were Mr. Downe’s daughters by a former wife; but they are married
and living in other parts of the town. Mrs. Downe lives alone.’
</p>
<p>
‘Quite alone?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, sir; quite alone.’
</p>
<p>
The newly-arrived gentleman went back to the hotel and dined; after which he
made some change in his dress, shaved back his beard to the fashion that had
prevailed twenty years earlier, when he was young and interesting, and once
more emerging, bent his steps in the direction of the harbour-road. Just before
getting to the point where the pavement ceased and the houses isolated
themselves, he overtook a shambling, stooping, unshaven man, who at first sight
appeared like a professional tramp, his shoulders having a perceptible
greasiness as they passed under the gaslight. Each pedestrian momentarily
turned and regarded the other, and the tramp-like gentleman started back.
</p>
<p>
‘Good—why—is that Mr. Barnet? ’Tis Mr. Barnet,
surely!’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; and you are Charlson?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes—ah—you notice my appearance. The Fates have rather
ill-used me. By-the-bye, that fifty pounds. I never paid it, did I? . . . But I
was not ungrateful!’ Here the stooping man laid one hand emphatically on
the palm of the other. ‘I gave you a chance, Mr. George Barnet, which
many men would have thought full value received—the chance to marry your
Lucy. As far as the world was concerned, your wife was a <i>drowned woman</i>,
hey?’
</p>
<p>
‘Heaven forbid all that, Charlson!’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, well, ’twas a wrong way of showing gratitude, I suppose. And
now a drop of something to drink for old acquaintance’ sake! And Mr.
Barnet, she’s again free—there’s a chance now if you care for
it—ha, ha!’ And the speaker pushed his tongue into his hollow cheek
and slanted his eye in the old fashion.
</p>
<p>
‘I know all,’ said Barnet quickly; and slipping a small present
into the hands of the needy, saddening man, he stepped ahead and was soon in
the outskirts of the town.
</p>
<p>
He reached the harbour-road, and paused before the entrance to a well-known
house. It was so highly bosomed in trees and shrubs planted since the erection
of the building that one would scarcely have recognized the spot as that which
had been a mere neglected slope till chosen as a site for a dwelling. He opened
the swing-gate, closed it noiselessly, and gently moved into the semicircular
drive, which remained exactly as it had been marked out by Barnet on the
morning when Lucy Savile ran in to thank him for procuring her the post of
governess to Downe’s children. But the growth of trees and bushes which
revealed itself at every step was beyond all expectation; sun-proof and
moon-proof bowers vaulted the walks, and the walls of the house were uniformly
bearded with creeping plants as high as the first-floor windows.
</p>
<p>
After lingering for a few minutes in the dusk of the bending boughs, the
visitor rang the door-bell, and on the servant appearing, he announced himself
as ‘an old friend of Mrs. Downe’s.’
</p>
<p>
The hall was lighted, but not brightly, the gas being turned low, as if
visitors were rare. There was a stagnation in the dwelling; it seemed to be
waiting. Could it really be waiting for him? The partitions which had been
probed by Barnet’s walking-stick when the mortar was green, were now
quite brown with the antiquity of their varnish, and the ornamental woodwork of
the staircase, which had glistened with a pale yellow newness when first
erected, was now of a rich wine-colour. During the servant’s absence the
following colloquy could be dimly heard through the nearly closed door of the
drawing-room.
</p>
<p>
‘He didn’t give his name?’
</p>
<p>
‘He only said “an old friend,” ma’am.’
</p>
<p>
‘What kind of gentleman is he?’
</p>
<p>
‘A staidish gentleman, with gray hair.’
</p>
<p>
The voice of the second speaker seemed to affect the listener greatly. After a
pause, the lady said, ‘Very well, I will see him.’
</p>
<p>
And the stranger was shown in face to face with the Lucy who had once been Lucy
Savile. The round cheek of that formerly young lady had, of course, alarmingly
flattened its curve in her modern representative; a pervasive grayness
overspread her once dark brown hair, like morning rime on heather. The parting
down the middle was wide and jagged; once it had been a thin white line, a
narrow crevice between two high banks of shade. But there was still enough left
to form a handsome knob behind, and some curls beneath inwrought with a few
hairs like silver wires were very becoming. In her eyes the only modification
was that their originally mild rectitude of expression had become a little more
stringent than heretofore. Yet she was still girlish—a girl who had been
gratuitously weighted by destiny with a burden of five-and-forty years instead
of her proper twenty.
</p>
<p>
‘Lucy, don’t you know me?’ he said, when the servant had
closed the door.
</p>
<p>
‘I knew you the instant I saw you!’ she returned cheerfully.
‘I don’t know why, but I always thought you would come back to your
old town again.’
</p>
<p>
She gave him her hand, and then they sat down. ‘They said you were
dead,’ continued Lucy, ‘but I never thought so. We should have
heard of it for certain if you had been.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is a very long time since we met.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; what you must have seen, Mr. Barnet, in all these roving years, in
comparison with what I have seen in this quiet place!’ Her face grew more
serious. ‘You know my husband has been dead a long time? I am a lonely
old woman now, considering what I have been; though Mr. Downe’s
daughters—all married—manage to keep me pretty cheerful.’
</p>
<p>
‘And I am a lonely old man, and have been any time these twenty
years.’
</p>
<p>
‘But where have you kept yourself? And why did you go off so
mysteriously?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, Lucy, I have kept myself a little in America, and a little in
Australia, a little in India, a little at the Cape, and so on; I have not
stayed in any place for a long time, as it seems to me, and yet more than
twenty years have flown. But when people get to my age two years go like
one!—Your second question, why did I go away so mysteriously, is surely
not necessary. You guessed why, didn’t you?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, I never once guessed,’ she said simply; ‘nor did
Charles, nor did anybody as far as I know.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, indeed! Now think it over again, and then look at me, and say if
you can’t guess?’
</p>
<p>
She looked him in the face with an inquiring smile. ‘Surely not because
of me?’ she said, pausing at the commencement of surprise.
</p>
<p>
Barnet nodded, and smiled again; but his smile was sadder than hers.
</p>
<p>
‘Because I married Charles?’ she asked.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes; solely because you married him on the day I was free to ask you to
marry me. My wife died four-and-twenty hours before you went to church with
Downe. The fixing of my journey at that particular moment was because of her
funeral; but once away I knew I should have no inducement to come back, and
took my steps accordingly.’
</p>
<p>
Her face assumed an aspect of gentle reflection, and she looked up and down his
form with great interest in her eyes. ‘I never thought of it!’ she
said. ‘I knew, of course, that you had once implied some warmth of
feeling towards me, but I concluded that it passed off. And I have always been
under the impression that your wife was alive at the time of my marriage. Was
it not stupid of me!—But you will have some tea or something? I have
never dined late, you know, since my husband’s death. I have got into the
way of making a regular meal of tea. You will have some tea with me, will you
not?’
</p>
<p>
The travelled man assented quite readily, and tea was brought in. They sat and
chatted over the meal, regardless of the flying hour. ‘Well, well!’
said Barnet presently, as for the first time he leisurely surveyed the room;
‘how like it all is, and yet how different! Just where your piano stands
was a board on a couple of trestles, bearing the patterns of wall-papers, when
I was last here. I was choosing them—standing in this way, as it might
be. Then my servant came in at the door, and handed me a note, so. It was from
Downe, and announced that you were just going to be married to him. I chose no
more wall-papers—tore up all those I had selected, and left the house. I
never entered it again till now.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, at last I understand it all,’ she murmured.
</p>
<p>
They had both risen and gone to the fireplace. The mantel came almost on a
level with her shoulder, which gently rested against it, and Barnet laid his
hand upon the shelf close beside her shoulder. ‘Lucy,’ he said,
‘better late than never. Will you marry me now?’
</p>
<p>
She started back, and the surprise which was so obvious in her wrought even
greater surprise in him that it should be so. It was difficult to believe that
she had been quite blind to the situation, and yet all reason and common sense
went to prove that she was not acting.
</p>
<p>
‘You take me quite unawares by such a question!’ she said, with a
forced laugh of uneasiness. It was the first time she had shown any
embarrassment at all. ‘Why,’ she added, ‘I couldn’t
marry you for the world.’
</p>
<p>
‘Not after all this! Why not?’
</p>
<p>
‘It is—I would—I really think I may say it—I would upon
the whole rather marry you, Mr. Barnet, than any other man I have ever met, if
I ever dreamed of marriage again. But I don’t dream of it—it is
quite out of my thoughts; I have not the least intention of marrying
again.’
</p>
<p>
‘But—on my account—couldn’t you alter your plans a
little? Come!’
</p>
<p>
‘Dear Mr. Barnet,’ she said with a little flutter, ‘I would
on your account if on anybody’s in existence. But you don’t know in
the least what it is you are asking—such an impracticable thing—I
won’t say ridiculous, of course, because I see that you are really in
earnest, and earnestness is never ridiculous to my mind.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, yes,’ said Barnet more slowly, dropping her hand, which he
had taken at the moment of pleading, ‘I am in earnest. The resolve, two
months ago, at the Cape, to come back once more was, it is true, rather sudden,
and as I see now, not well considered. But I am in earnest in asking.’
</p>
<p>
‘And I in declining. With all good feeling and all kindness, let me say
that I am quite opposed to the idea of marrying a second time.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, no harm has been done,’ he answered, with the same subdued
and tender humorousness that he had shown on such occasions in early life.
‘If you really won’t accept me, I must put up with it, I
suppose.’ His eye fell on the clock as he spoke. ‘Had you any
notion that it was so late?’ he asked. ‘How absorbed I have
been!’
</p>
<p>
She accompanied him to the hall, helped him to put on his overcoat, and let him
out of the house herself.
</p>
<p>
‘Good-night,’ said Barnet, on the doorstep, as the lamp shone in
his face. ‘You are not offended with me?’
</p>
<p>
‘Certainly not. Nor you with me?’
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll consider whether I am or not,’ he pleasantly replied.
‘Good-night.’
</p>
<p>
She watched him safely through the gate; and when his footsteps had died away
upon the road, closed the door softly and returned to the room. Here the modest
widow long pondered his speeches, with eyes dropped to an unusually low level.
Barnet’s urbanity under the blow of her refusal greatly impressed her.
After having his long period of probation rendered useless by her decision, he
had shown no anger, and had philosophically taken her words as if he deserved
no better ones. It was very gentlemanly of him, certainly; it was more than
gentlemanly; it was heroic and grand. The more she meditated, the more she
questioned the virtue of her conduct in checking him so peremptorily; and went
to her bedroom in a mood of dissatisfaction. On looking in the glass she was
reminded that there was not so much remaining of her former beauty as to make
his frank declaration an impulsive natural homage to her cheeks and eyes; it
must undoubtedly have arisen from an old staunch feeling of his, deserving
tenderest consideration. She recalled to her mind with much pleasure that he
had told her he was staying at the Black-Bull Hotel; so that if, after waiting
a day or two, he should not, in his modesty, call again, she might then send
him a nice little note. To alter her views for the present was far from her
intention; but she would allow herself to be induced to reconsider the case, as
any generous woman ought to do.
</p>
<p>
The morrow came and passed, and Mr. Barnet did not drop in. At every knock,
light youthful hues flew across her cheek; and she was abstracted in the
presence of her other visitors. In the evening she walked about the house, not
knowing what to do with herself; the conditions of existence seemed totally
different from those which ruled only four-and-twenty short hours ago. What had
been at first a tantalizing elusive sentiment was getting acclimatized within
her as a definite hope, and her person was so informed by that emotion that she
might almost have stood as its emblematical representative by the time the
clock struck ten. In short, an interest in Barnet precisely resembling that of
her early youth led her present heart to belie her yesterday’s words to
him, and she longed to see him again.
</p>
<p>
The next day she walked out early, thinking she might meet him in the street.
The growing beauty of her romance absorbed her, and she went from the street to
the fields, and from the fields to the shore, without any consciousness of
distance, till reminded by her weariness that she could go no further. He had
nowhere appeared. In the evening she took a step which under the circumstances
seemed justifiable; she wrote a note to him at the hotel, inviting him to tea
with her at six precisely, and signing her note ‘Lucy.’
</p>
<p>
In a quarter of an hour the messenger came back. Mr. Barnet had left the hotel
early in the morning of the day before, but he had stated that he would
probably return in the course of the week.
</p>
<p>
The note was sent back, to be given to him immediately on his arrival.
</p>
<p>
There was no sign from the inn that this desired event had occurred, either on
the next day or the day following. On both nights she had been restless, and
had scarcely slept half-an-hour.
</p>
<p>
On the Saturday, putting off all diffidence, Lucy went herself to the
Black-Bull, and questioned the staff closely.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Barnet had cursorily remarked when leaving that he might return on the
Thursday or Friday, but they were directed not to reserve a room for him unless
he should write.
</p>
<p>
He had left no address.
</p>
<p>
Lucy sorrowfully took back her note went home, and resolved to wait.
</p>
<p>
She did wait—years and years—but Barnet never reappeared.
</p>
<p class="p2">
<i>April</i> 1880.
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap06"/>INTERLOPERS AT THE KNAP</h2>
<h3>CHAPTER I</h3>
<p>
The north road from Casterbridge is tedious and lonely, especially in
winter-time. Along a part of its course it connects with Long-Ash Lane, a
monotonous track without a village or hamlet for many miles, and with very
seldom a turning. Unapprized wayfarers who are too old, or too young, or in
other respects too weak for the distance to be traversed, but who,
nevertheless, have to walk it, say, as they look wistfully ahead, ‘Once
at the top of that hill, and I must surely see the end of Long-Ash Lane!’
But they reach the hilltop, and Long-Ash Lane stretches in front as mercilessly
as before.
</p>
<p>
Some few years ago a certain farmer was riding through this lane in the gloom
of a winter evening. The farmer’s friend, a dairyman, was riding beside
him. A few paces in the rear rode the farmer’s man. All three were well
horsed on strong, round-barrelled cobs; and to be well horsed was to be in
better spirits about Long-Ash Lane than poor pedestrians could attain to during
its passage.
</p>
<p>
But the farmer did not talk much to his friend as he rode along. The enterprise
which had brought him there filled his mind; for in truth it was important. Not
altogether so important was it, perhaps, when estimated by its value to society
at large; but if the true measure of a deed be proportionate to the space it
occupies in the heart of him who undertakes it, Farmer Charles Darton’s
business to-night could hold its own with the business of kings.
</p>
<p>
He was a large farmer. His turnover, as it is called, was probably thirty
thousand pounds a year. He had a great many draught horses, a great many milch
cows, and of sheep a multitude. This comfortable position was, however, none of
his own making. It had been created by his father, a man of a very different
stamp from the present representative of the line.
</p>
<p>
Darton, the father, had been a one-idea’d character, with a buttoned-up
pocket and a chink-like eye brimming with commercial subtlety. In Darton the
son, this trade subtlety had become transmuted into emotional, and the
harshness had disappeared; he would have been called a sad man but for his
constant care not to divide himself from lively friends by piping notes out of
harmony with theirs. Contemplative, he allowed his mind to be a quiet
meeting-place for memories and hopes. So that, naturally enough, since
succeeding to the agricultural calling, and up to his present age of
thirty-two, he had neither advanced nor receded as a capitalist—a
stationary result which did not agitate one of his unambitious, unstrategic
nature, since he had all that he desired. The motive of his expedition to-night
showed the same absence of anxious regard for Number One.
</p>
<p>
The party rode on in the slow, safe trot proper to night-time and bad roads,
Farmer Darton’s head jigging rather unromantically up and down against
the sky, and his motions being repeated with bolder emphasis by his friend
Japheth Johns; while those of the latter were travestied in jerks still less
softened by art in the person of the lad who attended them. A pair of whitish
objects hung one on each side of the latter, bumping against him at each step,
and still further spoiling the grace of his seat. On close inspection they
might have been perceived to be open rush baskets—one containing a
turkey, and the other some bottles of wine.
</p>
<p>
‘D’ye feel ye can meet your fate like a man, neighbour
Darton?’ asked Johns, breaking a silence which had lasted while
five-and-twenty hedgerow trees had glided by.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Darton with a half-laugh murmured, ‘Ay—call it my fate! Hanging
and wiving go by destiny.’ And then they were silent again.
</p>
<p>
The darkness thickened rapidly, at intervals shutting down on the land in a
perceptible flap, like the wave of a wing. The customary close of day was
accelerated by a simultaneous blurring of the air. With the fall of night had
come a mist just damp enough to incommode, but not sufficient to saturate them.
Countrymen as they were—born, as may be said, with only an open door
between them and the four seasons—they regarded the mist but as an added
obscuration, and ignored its humid quality.
</p>
<p>
They were travelling in a direction that was enlivened by no modern current of
traffic, the place of Darton’s pilgrimage being an old-fashioned
village—one of the Hintocks (several villages of that name, with a
distinctive prefix or affix, lying thereabout)—where the people make the
best cider and cider-wine in all Wessex, and where the dunghills smell of
pomace instead of stable refuse as elsewhere. The lane was sometimes so narrow
that the brambles of the hedge, which hung forward like anglers’ rods
over a stream, scratched their hats and curry-combed their whiskers as they
passed. Yet this neglected lane had been a highway to Queen Elizabeth’s
subjects and the cavalcades of the past. Its day was over now, and its history
as a national artery done for ever.
</p>
<p>
‘Why I have decided to marry her,’ resumed Darton (in a measured
musical voice of confidence which revealed a good deal of his composition), as
he glanced round to see that the lad was not too near, ‘is not only that
I like her, but that I can do no better, even from a fairly practical point of
view. That I might ha’ looked higher is possibly true, though it is
really all nonsense. I have had experience enough in looking above me.
“No more superior women for me,” said I—you know when. Sally
is a comely, independent, simple character, with no make-up about her,
who’ll think me as much a superior to her as I used to think—you
know who I mean—was to me.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ay,’ said Johns. ‘However, I shouldn’t call Sally Hall
simple. Primary, because no Sally is; secondary, because if some could be, this
one wouldn’t. ’Tis a wrong denomination to apply to a woman,
Charles, and affects me, as your best man, like cold water. ’Tis like
recommending a stage play by saying there’s neither murder, villainy, nor
harm of any sort in it, when that’s what you’ve paid your
half-crown to see.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well; may your opinion do you good. Mine’s a different one.’
And turning the conversation from the philosophical to the practical, Darton
expressed a hope that the said Sally had received what he’d sent on by
the carrier that day.
</p>
<p>
Johns wanted to know what that was.
</p>
<p>
‘It is a dress,’ said Darton. ‘Not exactly a wedding-dress;
though she may use it as one if she likes. It is rather serviceable than
showy—suitable for the winter weather.’
</p>
<p>
‘Good,’ said Johns. ‘Serviceable is a wise word in a
bridegroom. I commend ye, Charles.’
</p>
<p>
‘For,’ said Darton, ‘why should a woman dress up like a
rope-dancer because she’s going to do the most solemn deed of her life
except dying?’
</p>
<p>
‘Faith, why? But she will, because she will, I suppose,’ said
Dairyman Johns.
</p>
<p>
‘H’m,’ said Darton.
</p>
<p>
The lane they followed had been nearly straight for several miles, but it now
took a turn, and winding uncertainly for some distance forked into two. By
night country roads are apt to reveal ungainly qualities which pass without
observation during day; and though Darton had travelled this way before, he had
not done so frequently, Sally having been wooed at the house of a relative near
his own. He never remembered seeing at this spot a pair of alternative ways
looking so equally probable as these two did now. Johns rode on a few steps.
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t be out of heart, sonny,’ he cried. ‘Here’s
a handpost. Enoch—come and climm this post, and tell us the way.’
</p>
<p>
The lad dismounted, and jumped into the hedge where the post stood under a
tree.
</p>
<p>
‘Unstrap the baskets, or you’ll smash up that wine!’ cried
Darton, as the young man began spasmodically to climb the post, baskets and
all.
</p>
<p>
‘Was there ever less head in a brainless world?’ said Johns.
‘Here, simple Nocky, I’ll do it.’ He leapt off, and with much
puffing climbed the post, striking a match when he reached the top, and moving
the light along the arm, the lad standing and gazing at the spectacle.
</p>
<p>
‘I have faced tantalization these twenty years with a temper as mild as
milk!’ said Japheth; ‘but such things as this don’t come
short of devilry!’ And flinging the match away, he slipped down to the
ground.
</p>
<p>
‘What’s the matter?’ asked Darton.
</p>
<p>
‘Not a letter, sacred or heathen—not so much as would tell us the
way to the great fireplace—ever I should sin to say it! Either the moss
and mildew have eat away the words, or we have arrived in a land where the
natyves have lost the art o’ writing, and should ha’ brought our
compass like Christopher Columbus.’
</p>
<p>
‘Let us take the straightest road,’ said Darton placidly; ‘I
shan’t be sorry to get there—’tis a tiresome ride. I would
have driven if I had known.’
</p>
<p>
‘Nor I neither, sir,’ said Enoch. ‘These straps plough my
shoulder like a zull. If ’tis much further to your lady’s home,
Maister Darton, I shall ask to be let carry half of these good things in my
innerds—hee, hee!’
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t you be such a reforming radical, Enoch,’ said Johns
sternly. ‘Here, I’ll take the turkey.’
</p>
<p>
This being done, they went forward by the right-hand lane, which ascended a
hill, the left winding away under a plantation. The pit-a-pat of their
horses’ hoofs lessened up the slope; and the ironical directing-post
stood in solitude as before, holding out its blank arms to the raw breeze,
which brought a snore from the wood as if Skrymir the Giant were sleeping
there.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II</h3>
<p>
Three miles to the left of the travellers, along the road they had not
followed, rose an old house with mullioned windows of Ham-hill stone, and
chimneys of lavish solidity. It stood at the top of a slope beside
King’s-Hintock village-street; and immediately in front of it grew a
large sycamore-tree, whose bared roots formed a convenient staircase from the
road below to the front door of the dwelling. Its situation gave the house what
little distinctive name it possessed, namely, ‘The Knap.’ Some
forty yards off a brook dribbled past, which, for its size, made a great deal
of noise. At the back was a dairy barton, accessible for vehicles and
live-stock by a side ‘drong.’ Thus much only of the character of
the homestead could be divined out of doors at this shady evening-time.
</p>
<p>
But within there was plenty of light to see by, as plenty was construed at
Hintock. Beside a Tudor fireplace, whose moulded four-centred arch was nearly
hidden by a figured blue-cloth blower, were seated two women—mother and
daughter—Mrs. Hall, and Sarah, or Sally; for this was a part of the world
where the latter modification had not as yet been effaced as a vulgarity by the
march of intellect. The owner of the name was the young woman by whose means
Mr. Darton proposed to put an end to his bachelor condition on the approaching
day.
</p>
<p>
The mother’s bereavement had been so long ago as not to leave much mark
of its occurrence upon her now, either in face or clothes. She had resumed the
mob-cap of her early married life, enlivening its whiteness by a few
rose-du-Barry ribbons. Sally required no such aids to pinkness. Roseate
good-nature lit up her gaze; her features showed curves of decision and
judgment; and she might have been regarded without much mistake as a
warm-hearted, quick-spirited, handsome girl.
</p>
<p>
She did most of the talking, her mother listening with a half-absent air, as
she picked up fragments of red-hot wood ember with the tongs, and piled them
upon the brands. But the number of speeches that passed was very small in
proportion to the meanings exchanged. Long experience together often enabled
them to see the course of thought in each other’s minds without a word
being spoken. Behind them, in the centre of the room, the table was spread for
supper, certain whiffs of air laden with fat vapours, which ever and anon
entered from the kitchen, denoting its preparation there.
</p>
<p>
‘The new gown he was going to send you stays about on the way like
himself,’ Sally’s mother was saying.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, not finished, I daresay,’ cried Sally independently.
‘Lord, I shouldn’t be amazed if it didn’t come at all! Young
men make such kind promises when they are near you, and forget ’em when
they go away. But he doesn’t intend it as a wedding-gown—he gives
it to me merely as a gown to wear when I like—a travelling-dress is what
it would be called by some. Come rathe or come late it don’t much matter,
as I have a dress of my own to fall back upon. But what time is it?’
</p>
<p>
She went to the family clock and opened the glass, for the hour was not
otherwise discernible by night, and indeed at all times was rather a thing to
be investigated than beheld, so much more wall than window was there in the
apartment. ‘It is nearly eight,’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘Eight o’clock, and neither dress nor man,’ said Mrs. Hall.
</p>
<p>
‘Mother, if you think to tantalize me by talking like that, you are much
mistaken! Let him be as late as he will—or stay away altogether—I
don’t care,’ said Sally. But a tender, minute quaver in the
negation showed that there was something forced in that statement.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall perceived it, and drily observed that she was not so sure about Sally
not caring. ‘But perhaps you don’t care so much as I do, after
all,’ she said. ‘For I see what you don’t, that it is a good
and flourishing match for you; a very honourable offer in Mr. Darton. And I
think I see a kind husband in him. So pray God ’twill go smooth, and wind
up well.’
</p>
<p>
Sally would not listen to misgivings. Of course it would go smoothly, she
asserted. ‘How you are up and down, mother!’ she went on. ‘At
this moment, whatever hinders him, we are not so anxious to see him as he is to
be here, and his thought runs on before him, and settles down upon us like the
star in the east. Hark!’ she exclaimed, with a breath of relief, her eyes
sparkling. ‘I heard something. Yes—here they are!’
</p>
<p>
The next moment her mother’s slower ear also distinguished the familiar
reverberation occasioned by footsteps clambering up the roots of the sycamore.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes it sounds like them at last,’ she said. ‘Well, it is not
so very late after all, considering the distance.’
</p>
<p>
The footfall ceased, and they arose, expecting a knock. They began to think it
might have been, after all, some neighbouring villager under Bacchic influence,
giving the centre of the road a wide berth, when their doubts were dispelled by
the new-comer’s entry into the passage. The door of the room was gently
opened, and there appeared, not the pair of travellers with whom we have
already made acquaintance, but a pale-faced man in the garb of extreme
poverty—almost in rags.
</p>
<p>
‘O, it’s a tramp—gracious me!’ said Sally, starting
back.
</p>
<p>
His cheeks and eye-orbits were deep concaves—rather, it might be, from
natural weakness of constitution than irregular living, though there were
indications that he had led no careful life. He gazed at the two women fixedly
for a moment: then with an abashed, humiliated demeanour, dropped his glance to
the floor, and sank into a chair without uttering a word.
</p>
<p>
Sally was in advance of her mother, who had remained standing by the fire. She
now tried to discern the visitor across the candles.
</p>
<p>
‘Why—mother,’ said Sally faintly, turning back to Mrs. Hall.
‘It is Phil, from Australia!’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall started, and grew pale, and a fit of coughing seized the man with the
ragged clothes. ‘To come home like this!’ she said. ‘O,
Philip—are you ill?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, no, mother,’ replied he impatiently, as soon as he could
speak.
</p>
<p>
‘But for God’s sake how do you come here—and just now
too?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I am here,’ said the man. ‘How it is I hardly know.
I’ve come home, mother, because I was driven to it. Things were against
me out there, and went from bad to worse.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then why didn’t you let us know?—you’ve not writ a
line for the last two or three years.’
</p>
<p>
The son admitted sadly that he had not. He said that he had hoped and thought
he might fetch up again, and be able to send good news. Then he had been
obliged to abandon that hope, and had finally come home from sheer
necessity—previously to making a new start. ‘Yes, things are very
bad with me,’ he repeated, perceiving their commiserating glances at his
clothes.
</p>
<p>
They brought him nearer the fire, took his hat from his thin hand, which was so
small and smooth as to show that his attempts to fetch up again had not been in
a manual direction. His mother resumed her inquiries, and dubiously asked if he
had chosen to come that particular night for any special reason.
</p>
<p>
For no reason, he told her. His arrival had been quite at random. Then Philip
Hall looked round the room, and saw for the first time that the table was laid
somewhat luxuriously, and for a larger number than themselves; and that an air
of festivity pervaded their dress. He asked quickly what was going on.
</p>
<p>
‘Sally is going to be married in a day or two,’ replied the mother;
and she explained how Mr. Darton, Sally’s intended husband, was coming
there that night with the groomsman, Mr. Johns, and other details. ‘We
thought it must be their step when we heard you,’ said Mrs. Hall.
</p>
<p>
The needy wanderer looked again on the floor. ‘I see—I see,’
he murmured. ‘Why, indeed, should I have come to-night? Such folk as I
are not wanted here at these times, naturally. And I have no business
here—spoiling other people’s happiness.’
</p>
<p>
‘Phil,’ said his mother, with a tear in her eye, but with a
thinness of lip and severity of manner which were presumably not more than past
events justified; ‘since you speak like that to me, I’ll speak
honestly to you. For these three years you have taken no thought for us. You
left home with a good supply of money, and strength and education, and you
ought to have made good use of it all. But you come back like a beggar; and
that you come in a very awkward time for us cannot be denied. Your return
to-night may do us much harm. But mind—you are welcome to this home as
long as it is mine. I don’t wish to turn you adrift. We will make the
best of a bad job; and I hope you are not seriously ill?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no. I have only this infernal cough.’
</p>
<p>
She looked at him anxiously. ‘I think you had better go to bed at
once,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘Well—I shall be out of the way there,’ said the son wearily.
‘Having ruined myself, don’t let me ruin you by being seen in these
togs, for Heaven’s sake. Who do you say Sally is going to be married
to—a Farmer Darton?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes—a gentleman-farmer—quite a wealthy man. Far better in
station than she could have expected. It is a good thing, altogether.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well done, little Sal!’ said her brother, brightening and looking
up at her with a smile. ‘I ought to have written; but perhaps I have
thought of you all the more. But let me get out of sight. I would rather go and
jump into the river than be seen here. But have you anything I can drink? I am
confoundedly thirsty with my long tramp.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes, we will bring something upstairs to you,’ said Sally,
with grief in her face.
</p>
<p>
‘Ay, that will do nicely. But, Sally and mother—’ He stopped,
and they waited. ‘Mother, I have not told you all,’ he resumed
slowly, still looking on the floor between his knees. ‘Sad as what you
see of me is, there’s worse behind.’
</p>
<p>
His mother gazed upon him in grieved suspense, and Sally went and leant upon
the bureau, listening for every sound, and sighing. Suddenly she turned round,
saying, ‘Let them come, I don’t care! Philip, tell the worst, and
take your time.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, then,’ said the unhappy Phil, ‘I am not the only one
in this mess. Would to Heaven I were! But—’
</p>
<p>
‘O, Phil!’
</p>
<p>
‘I have a wife as destitute as I.’
</p>
<p>
‘A wife?’ said his mother.
</p>
<p>
‘Unhappily!’
</p>
<p>
‘A wife! Yes, that is the way with sons!’
</p>
<p>
‘And besides—’ said he.
</p>
<p>
‘Besides! O, Philip, surely—’
</p>
<p>
‘I have two little children.’
</p>
<p>
‘Wife and children!’ whispered Mrs. Hall, sinking down confounded.
</p>
<p>
‘Poor little things!’ said Sally involuntarily.
</p>
<p>
His mother turned again to him. ‘I suppose these helpless beings are left
in Australia?’
</p>
<p>
‘No. They are in England.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I can only hope you’ve left them in a respectable
place.’
</p>
<p>
‘I have not left them at all. They are here—within a few yards of
us. In short, they are in the stable.’
</p>
<p>
‘Where?’
</p>
<p>
‘In the stable. I did not like to bring them indoors till I had seen you,
mother, and broken the bad news a bit to you. They were very tired, and are
resting out there on some straw.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall’s fortitude visibly broke down. She had been brought up not
without refinement, and was even more moved by such a collapse of genteel aims
as this than a substantial dairyman’s widow would in ordinary have been
moved. ‘Well, it must be borne,’ she said, in a low voice, with her
hands tightly joined. ‘A starving son, a starving wife, starving
children! Let it be. But why is this come to us now, to-day, to-night? Could no
other misfortune happen to helpless women than this, which will quite upset my
poor girl’s chance of a happy life? Why have you done us this wrong,
Philip? What respectable man will come here, and marry open-eyed into a family
of vagabonds?’
</p>
<p>
‘Nonsense, mother!’ said Sally vehemently, while her face flushed.
‘Charley isn’t the man to desert me. But if he should be, and
won’t marry me because Phil’s come, let him go and marry elsewhere.
I won’t be ashamed of my own flesh and blood for any man in
England—not I!’ And then Sally turned away and burst into tears.
</p>
<p>
‘Wait till you are twenty years older and you will tell a different
tale,’ replied her mother.
</p>
<p>
The son stood up. ‘Mother,’ he said bitterly, ‘as I have
come, so I will go. All I ask of you is that you will allow me and mine to lie
in your stable to-night. I give you my word that we’ll be gone by break
of day, and trouble you no further!’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall, the mother, changed at that. ‘O no,’ she answered
hastily; ‘never shall it be said that I sent any of my own family from my
door. Bring ’em in, Philip, or take me out to them.’
</p>
<p>
‘We will put ’em all into the large bedroom,’ said Sally,
brightening, ‘and make up a large fire. Let’s go and help them in,
and call Rebekah.’ (Rebekah was the woman who assisted at the dairy and
housework; she lived in a cottage hard by with her husband, who attended to the
cows.)
</p>
<p>
Sally went to fetch a lantern from the back-kitchen, but her brother said,
‘You won’t want a light. I lit the lantern that was hanging
there.’
</p>
<p>
‘What must we call your wife?’ asked Mrs. Hall.
</p>
<p>
‘Helena,’ said Philip.
</p>
<p>
With shawls over their heads they proceeded towards the back door.
</p>
<p>
‘One minute before you go,’ interrupted Philip. ‘I—I
haven’t confessed all.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then Heaven help us!’ said Mrs. Hall, pushing to the door and
clasping her hands in calm despair.
</p>
<p>
‘We passed through Evershead as we came,’ he continued, ‘and
I just looked in at the “Sow-and-Acorn” to see if old Mike still
kept on there as usual. The carrier had come in from Sherton Abbas at that
moment, and guessing that I was bound for this place—for I think he knew
me—he asked me to bring on a dressmaker’s parcel for Sally that was
marked “immediate.” My wife had walked on with the children.
’Twas a flimsy parcel, and the paper was torn, and I found on looking at
it that it was a thick warm gown. I didn’t wish you to see poor Helena in
a shabby state. I was ashamed that you should—’twas not what she
was born to. I untied the parcel in the road, took it on to her where she was
waiting in the Lower Barn, and told her I had managed to get it for her, and
that she was to ask no question. She, poor thing, must have supposed I obtained
it on trust, through having reached a place where I was known, for she put it
on gladly enough. She has it on now. Sally has other gowns, I daresay.’
</p>
<p>
Sally looked at her mother, speechless.
</p>
<p>
‘You have others, I daresay!’ repeated Phil, with a sick
man’s impatience. ‘I thought to myself, “Better Sally cry
than Helena freeze.” Well, is the dress of great consequence? ’Twas
nothing very ornamental, as far as I could see.’
</p>
<p>
‘No—no; not of consequence,’ returned Sally sadly, adding in
a gentle voice, ‘You will not mind if I lend her another instead of that
one, will you?’
</p>
<p>
Philip’s agitation at the confession had brought on another attack of the
cough, which seemed to shake him to pieces. He was so obviously unfit to sit in
a chair that they helped him upstairs at once; and having hastily given him a
cordial and kindled the bedroom fire, they descended to fetch their unhappy new
relations.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER III</h3>
<p>
It was with strange feelings that the girl and her mother, lately so cheerful,
passed out of the back door into the open air of the barton, laden with hay
scents and the herby breath of cows. A fine sleet had begun to fall, and they
trotted across the yard quickly. The stable-door was open; a light shone from
it—from the lantern which always hung there, and which Philip had
lighted, as he said. Softly nearing the door, Mrs. Hall pronounced the name
‘Helena!’
</p>
<p>
There was no answer for the moment. Looking in she was taken by surprise. Two
people appeared before her. For one, instead of the drabbish woman she had
expected, Mrs. Hall saw a pale, dark-eyed, ladylike creature, whose personality
ruled her attire rather than was ruled by it. She was in a new and handsome
gown, of course, and an old bonnet. She was standing up, agitated; her hand was
held by her companion—none else than Sally’s affianced, Farmer
Charles Darton, upon whose fine figure the pale stranger’s eyes were
fixed, as his were fixed upon her. His other hand held the rein of his horse,
which was standing saddled as if just led in.
</p>
<p>
At sight of Mrs. Hall they both turned, looking at her in a way neither quite
conscious nor unconscious, and without seeming to recollect that words were
necessary as a solution to the scene. In another moment Sally entered also,
when Mr. Darton dropped his companion’s hand, led the horse aside, and
came to greet his betrothed and Mrs. Hall.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah!’ he said, smiling—with something like forced
composure—‘this is a roundabout way of arriving, you will say, my
dear Mrs. Hall. But we lost our way, which made us late. I saw a light here,
and led in my horse at once—my friend Johns and my man have gone back to
the little inn with theirs, not to crowd you too much. No sooner had I entered
than I saw that this lady had taken temporary shelter here—and found I
was intruding.’
</p>
<p>
‘She is my daughter-in-law,’ said Mrs. Hall calmly. ‘My son,
too, is in the house, but he has gone to bed unwell.’
</p>
<p>
Sally had stood staring wonderingly at the scene until this moment, hardly
recognizing Darton’s shake of the hand. The spell that bound her was
broken by her perceiving the two little children seated on a heap of hay. She
suddenly went forward, spoke to them, and took one on her arm and the other in
her hand.
</p>
<p>
‘And two children?’ said Mr. Darton, showing thus that he had not
been there long enough as yet to understand the situation.
</p>
<p>
‘My grandchildren,’ said Mrs. Hall, with as much affected ease as
before.
</p>
<p>
Philip Hall’s wife, in spite of this interruption to her first
rencounter, seemed scarcely so much affected by it as to feel any one’s
presence in addition to Mr. Darton’s. However, arousing herself by a
quick reflection, she threw a sudden critical glance of her sad eyes upon Mrs.
Hall; and, apparently finding her satisfactory, advanced to her in a meek
initiative. Then Sally and the stranger spoke some friendly words to each
other, and Sally went on with the children into the house. Mrs. Hall and Helena
followed, and Mr. Darton followed these, looking at Helena’s dress and
outline, and listening to her voice like a man in a dream.
</p>
<p>
By the time the others reached the house Sally had already gone upstairs with
the tired children. She rapped against the wall for Rebekah to come in and help
to attend to them, Rebekah’s house being a little
‘spit-and-dab’ cabin leaning against the substantial stone-work of
Mrs. Hall’s taller erection. When she came a bed was made up for the
little ones, and some supper given to them. On descending the stairs after
seeing this done Sally went to the sitting-room. Young Mrs. Hall entered it
just in advance of her, having in the interim retired with her mother-in-law to
take off her bonnet, and otherwise make herself presentable. Hence it was
evident that no further communication could have passed between her and Mr.
Darton since their brief interview in the stable.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Japheth Johns now opportunely arrived, and broke up the restraint of the
company, after a few orthodox meteorological commentaries had passed between
him and Mrs. Hall by way of introduction. They at once sat down to supper, the
present of wine and turkey not being produced for consumption to-night, lest
the premature display of those gifts should seem to throw doubt on Mrs.
Hall’s capacities as a provider.
</p>
<p>
‘Drink hearty, Mr. Johns—drink hearty,’ said that matron
magnanimously. ‘Such as it is there’s plenty of. But perhaps
cider-wine is not to your taste?—though there’s body in it.’
</p>
<p>
‘Quite the contrairy, ma’am—quite the contrairy,’ said
the dairyman. ‘For though I inherit the malt-liquor principle from my
father, I am a cider-drinker on my mother’s side. She came from these
parts, you know. And there’s this to be said for’t—’tis
a more peaceful liquor, and don’t lie about a man like your hotter
drinks. With care, one may live on it a twelvemonth without knocking down a
neighbour, or getting a black eye from an old acquaintance.’
</p>
<p>
The general conversation thus begun was continued briskly, though it was in the
main restricted to Mrs. Hall and Japheth, who in truth required but little help
from anybody. There being slight call upon Sally’s tongue, she had ample
leisure to do what her heart most desired, namely, watch her intended husband
and her sister-in-law with a view of elucidating the strange momentary scene in
which her mother and herself had surprised them in the stable. If that scene
meant anything, it meant, at least, that they had met before. That there had
been no time for explanations Sally could see, for their manner was still one
of suppressed amazement at each other’s presence there. Darton’s
eyes, too, fell continually on the gown worn by Helena as if this were an added
riddle to his perplexity; though to Sally it was the one feature in the case
which was no mystery. He seemed to feel that fate had impishly changed his
vis-à-vis in the lover’s jig he was about to foot; that while the
gown had been expected to enclose a Sally, a Helena’s face looked out
from the bodice; that some long-lost hand met his own from the sleeves.
</p>
<p>
Sally could see that whatever Helena might know of Darton, she knew nothing of
how the dress entered into his embarrassment. And at moments the young girl
would have persuaded herself that Darton’s looks at her sister-in-law
were entirely the fruit of the clothes query. But surely at other times a more
extensive range of speculation and sentiment was expressed by her lover’s
eye than that which the changed dress would account for.
</p>
<p>
Sally’s independence made her one of the least jealous of women. But
there was something in the relations of these two visitors which ought to be
explained.
</p>
<p>
Japheth Johns continued to converse in his well-known style, interspersing his
talk with some private reflections on the position of Darton and Sally, which,
though the sparkle in his eye showed them to be highly entertaining to himself,
were apparently not quite communicable to the company. At last he withdrew for
the night, going off to the roadside inn half-a-mile back, whither Darton
promised to follow him in a few minutes.
</p>
<p>
Half-an-hour passed, and then Mr. Darton also rose to leave, Sally and her
sister-in-law simultaneously wishing him good-night as they retired upstairs to
their rooms. But on his arriving at the front door with Mrs. Hall a sharp
shower of rain began to come down, when the widow suggested that he should
return to the fire-side till the storm ceased.
</p>
<p>
Darton accepted her proposal, but insisted that, as it was getting late, and
she was obviously tired, she should not sit up on his account, since he could
let himself out of the house, and would quite enjoy smoking a pipe by the
hearth alone. Mrs. Hall assented; and Darton was left by himself. He spread his
knees to the brands, lit up his tobacco as he had said, and sat gazing into the
fire, and at the notches of the chimney-crook which hung above.
</p>
<p>
An occasional drop of rain rolled down the chimney with a hiss, and still he
smoked on; but not like a man whose mind was at rest. In the long run, however,
despite his meditations, early hours afield and a long ride in the open air
produced their natural result. He began to doze.
</p>
<p>
How long he remained in this half-unconscious state he did not know. He
suddenly opened his eyes. The back-brand had burnt itself in two, and ceased to
flame; the light which he had placed on the mantelpiece had nearly gone out.
But in spite of these deficiencies there was a light in the apartment, and it
came from elsewhere. Turning his head he saw Philip Hall’s wife standing
at the entrance of the room with a bed-candle in one hand, a small brass
tea-kettle in the other, and <i>his</i> gown, as it certainly seemed, still
upon her.
</p>
<p>
‘Helena!’ said Darton, starting up.
</p>
<p>
Her countenance expressed dismay, and her first words were an apology.
‘I—did not know you were here, Mr. Darton,’ she said, while a
blush flashed to her cheek. ‘I thought every one had retired—I was
coming to make a little water boil; my husband seems to be worse. But perhaps
the kitchen fire can be lighted up again.’
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t go on my account. By all means put it on here as you
intended,’ said Darton. ‘Allow me to help you.’ He went
forward to take the kettle from her hand, but she did not allow him, and placed
it on the fire herself.
</p>
<p>
They stood some way apart, one on each side of the fireplace, waiting till the
water should boil, the candle on the mantel between them, and Helena with her
eyes on the kettle. Darton was the first to break the silence. ‘Shall I
call Sally?’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ she quickly returned. ‘We have given trouble enough
already. We have no right here. But we are the sport of fate, and were obliged
to come.’
</p>
<p>
‘No right here!’ said he in surprise.
</p>
<p>
‘None. I can’t explain it now,’ answered Helena. ‘This
kettle is very slow.’
</p>
<p>
There was another pause; the proverbial dilatoriness of watched pots was never
more clearly exemplified.
</p>
<p>
Helena’s face was of that sort which seems to ask for assistance without
the owner’s knowledge—the very antipodes of Sally’s, which
was self-reliance expressed. Darton’s eyes travelled from the kettle to
Helena’s face, then back to the kettle, then to the face for rather a
longer time. ‘So I am not to know anything of the mystery that has
distracted me all the evening?’ he said. ‘How is it that a woman,
who refused me because (as I supposed) my position was not good enough for her
taste, is found to be the wife of a man who certainly seems to be worse off
than I?’
</p>
<p>
‘He had the prior claim,’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘What! you knew him at that time?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, yes! Please say no more,’ she implored.
</p>
<p>
‘Whatever my errors, I have paid for them during the last five
years!’
</p>
<p>
The heart of Darton was subject to sudden overflowings. He was kind to a fault.
‘I am sorry from my soul,’ he said, involuntarily approaching her.
Helena withdrew a step or two, at which he became conscious of his movement,
and quickly took his former place. Here he stood without speaking, and the
little kettle began to sing.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, you might have been my wife if you had chosen,’ he said at
last. ‘But that’s all past and gone. However, if you are in any
trouble or poverty I shall be glad to be of service, and as your relation by
marriage I shall have a right to be. Does your uncle know of your
distress?’
</p>
<p>
‘My uncle is dead. He left me without a farthing. And now we have two
children to maintain.’
</p>
<p>
‘What, left you nothing? How could he be so cruel as that?’
</p>
<p>
‘I disgraced myself in his eyes.’
</p>
<p>
‘Now,’ said Darton earnestly, ‘let me take care of the
children, at least while you are so unsettled. <i>You</i> belong to another, so
I cannot take care of you.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes you can,’ said a voice; and suddenly a third figure stood
beside them. It was Sally. ‘You can, since you seem to wish to?’
she repeated. ‘She no longer belongs to another . . . My poor brother is
dead!’
</p>
<p>
Her face was red, her eyes sparkled, and all the woman came to the front.
‘I have heard it!’ she went on to him passionately. ‘You can
protect her now as well as the children!’ She turned then to her agitated
sister-in-law. ‘I heard something,’ said Sally (in a gentle murmur,
differing much from her previous passionate words), ‘and I went into his
room. It must have been the moment you left. He went off so quickly, and
weakly, and it was so unexpected, that I couldn’t leave even to call
you.’
</p>
<p>
Darton was just able to gather from the confused discourse which followed that,
during his sleep by the fire, this brother whom he had never seen had become
worse; and that during Helena’s absence for water the end had
unexpectedly come. The two young women hastened upstairs, and he was again left
alone.
</p>
<p class="p2">
After standing there a short time he went to the front door and looked out;
till, softly closing it behind him, he advanced and stood under the large
sycamore-tree. The stars were flickering coldly, and the dampness which had
just descended upon the earth in rain now sent up a chill from it. Darton was
in a strange position, and he felt it. The unexpected appearance, in deep
poverty, of Helena—a young lady, daughter of a deceased naval officer,
who had been brought up by her uncle, a solicitor, and had refused Darton in
marriage years ago—the passionate, almost angry demeanour of Sally at
discovering them, the abrupt announcement that Helena was a widow; all this
coming together was a conjuncture difficult to cope with in a moment, and made
him question whether he ought to leave the house or offer assistance. But for
Sally’s manner he would unhesitatingly have done the latter.
</p>
<p>
He was still standing under the tree when the door in front of him opened, and
Mrs. Hall came out. She went round to the garden-gate at the side without
seeing him. Darton followed her, intending to speak.
</p>
<p>
Pausing outside, as if in thought, she proceeded to a spot where the sun came
earliest in spring-time, and where the north wind never blew; it was where the
row of beehives stood under the wall. Discerning her object, he waited till she
had accomplished it.
</p>
<p>
It was the universal custom thereabout to wake the bees by tapping at their
hives whenever a death occurred in the household, under the belief that if this
were not done the bees themselves would pine away and perish during the ensuing
year. As soon as an interior buzzing responded to her tap at the first hive
Mrs. Hall went on to the second, and thus passed down the row. As soon as she
came back he met her.
</p>
<p>
‘What can I do in this trouble, Mrs. Hall?’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘O—nothing, thank you, nothing,’ she said in a tearful voice,
now just perceiving him. ‘We have called Rebekah and her husband, and
they will do everything necessary.’ She told him in a few words the
particulars of her son’s arrival, broken in health—indeed, at
death’s very door, though they did not suspect it—and suggested, as
the result of a conversation between her and her daughter, that the wedding
should be postponed.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, of course,’ said Darton. ‘I think now to go straight to
the inn and tell Johns what has happened.’ It was not till after he had
shaken hands with her that he turned hesitatingly and added, ‘Will you
tell the mother of his children that, as they are now left fatherless, I shall
be glad to take the eldest of them, if it would be any convenience to her and
to you?’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall promised that her son’s widow should he told of the offer, and
they parted. He retired down the rooty slope and disappeared in the direction
of the inn, where he informed Johns of the circumstances. Meanwhile Mrs. Hall
had entered the house, Sally was downstairs in the sitting-room alone, and her
mother explained to her that Darton had readily assented to the postponement.
</p>
<p>
‘No doubt he has,’ said Sally, with sad emphasis. ‘It is not
put off for a week, or a month, or a year. I shall never marry him, and she
will!’
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV</h3>
<p>
Time passed, and the household on the Knap became again serene under the
composing influences of daily routine. A desultory, very desultory
correspondence, dragged on between Sally Hall and Darton, who, not quite
knowing how to take her petulant words on the night of her brother’s
death, had continued passive thus long. Helena and her children remained at the
dairy-house, almost of necessity, and Darton therefore deemed it advisable to
stay away.
</p>
<p>
One day, seven months later on, when Mr. Darton was as usual at his farm,
twenty miles from Hintock, a note reached him from Helena. She thanked him for
his kind offer about her children, which her mother-in-law had duly
communicated, and stated that she would be glad to accept it as regarded the
eldest, the boy. Helena had, in truth, good need to do so, for her uncle had
left her penniless, and all application to some relatives in the north had
failed. There was, besides, as she said, no good school near Hintock to which
she could send the child.
</p>
<p>
On a fine summer day the boy came. He was accompanied half-way by Sally and his
mother—to the ‘White Horse,’ at Chalk Newton—where he
was handed over to Darton’s bailiff in a shining spring-cart, who met
them there.
</p>
<p>
He was entered as a day-scholar at a popular school at Casterbridge, three or
four miles from Darton’s, having first been taught by Darton to ride a
forest-pony, on which he cantered to and from the aforesaid fount of knowledge,
and (as Darton hoped) brought away a promising headful of the same at each
diurnal expedition. The thoughtful taciturnity into which Darton had latterly
fallen was quite dissipated by the presence of this boy.
</p>
<p>
When the Christmas holidays came it was arranged that he should spend them with
his mother. The journey was, for some reason or other, performed in two stages,
as at his coming, except that Darton in person took the place of the bailiff,
and that the boy and himself rode on horseback.
</p>
<p>
Reaching the renowned ‘White Horse,’ Darton inquired if Miss and
young Mrs. Hall were there to meet little Philip (as they had agreed to be). He
was answered by the appearance of Helena alone at the door.
</p>
<p>
‘At the last moment Sally would not come,’ she faltered.
</p>
<p>
That meeting practically settled the point towards which these long-severed
persons were converging. But nothing was broached about it for some time yet.
Sally Hall had, in fact, imparted the first decisive motion to events by
refusing to accompany Helena. She soon gave them a second move by writing the
following note
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘[Private.]<br/>
    
‘DEAR CHARLES,—Living here so long and intimately with Helena, I
have naturally learnt her history, especially that of it which refers to you. I
am sure she would accept you as a husband at the proper time, and I think you
ought to give her the opportunity. You inquire in an old note if I am sorry
that I showed temper (which it wasn’t) that night when I heard you
talking to her. No, Charles, I am not sorry at all for what I said
then.—Yours sincerely, SALLY HALL.’
</p>
<p>
Thus set in train, the transfer of Darton’s heart back to its original
quarters proceeded by mere lapse of time. In the following July, Darton went to
his friend Japheth to ask him at last to fulfil the bridal office which had
been in abeyance since the previous January twelvemonths.
</p>
<p>
‘With all my heart, man o’ constancy!’ said Dairyman Johns
warmly. ‘I’ve lost most of my genteel fair complexion haymaking
this hot weather, ’tis true, but I’ll do your business as well as
them that look better. There be scents and good hair-oil in the world yet,
thank God, and they’ll take off the roughest o’ my edge. I’ll
compliment her. “Better late than never, Sally Hall,” I’ll
say.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is not Sally,’ said Darton hurriedly. ‘It is young Mrs.
Hall.’
</p>
<p>
Japheth’s face, as soon as he really comprehended, became a picture of
reproachful dismay. ‘Not Sally?’ he said. ‘Why not Sally? I
can’t believe it! Young Mrs. Hall! Well, well—where’s your
wisdom?’
</p>
<p>
Darton shortly explained particulars; but Johns would not be reconciled.
‘She was a woman worth having if ever woman was,’ he cried.
‘And now to let her go!’
</p>
<p>
‘But I suppose I can marry where I like,’ said Darton.
</p>
<p>
‘H’m,’ replied the dairyman, lifting his eyebrows
expressively. ‘This don’t become you, Charles—it really do
not. If I had done such a thing you would have sworn I was a curst
no’thern fool to be drawn off the scent by such a red-herring
doll-oll-oll.’
</p>
<p>
Farmer Darton responded in such sharp terms to this laconic opinion that the
two friends finally parted in a way they had never parted before. Johns was to
be no groomsman to Darton after all. He had flatly declined. Darton went off
sorry, and even unhappy, particularly as Japheth was about to leave that side
of the county, so that the words which had divided them were not likely to be
explained away or softened down.
</p>
<p>
A short time after the interview Darton was united to Helena at a simple
matter-of fact wedding; and she and her little girl joined the boy who had
already grown to look on Darton’s house as home.
</p>
<p>
For some months the farmer experienced an unprecedented happiness and
satisfaction. There had been a flaw in his life, and it was as neatly mended as
was humanly possible. But after a season the stream of events followed less
clearly, and there were shades in his reveries. Helena was a fragile woman, of
little staying power, physically or morally, and since the time that he had
originally known her—eight or ten years before—she had been
severely tried. She had loved herself out, in short, and was now occasionally
given to moping. Sometimes she spoke regretfully of the gentilities of her
early life, and instead of comparing her present state with her condition as
the wife of the unlucky Hall, she mused rather on what it had been before she
took the first fatal step of clandestinely marrying him. She did not care to
please such people as those with whom she was thrown as a thriving
farmer’s wife. She allowed the pretty trifles of agricultural domesticity
to glide by her as sorry details, and had it not been for the children
Darton’s house would have seemed but little brighter than it had been
before.
</p>
<p>
This led to occasional unpleasantness, until Darton sometimes declared to
himself that such endeavours as his to rectify early deviations of the heart by
harking back to the old point mostly failed of success. ‘Perhaps Johns
was right,’ he would say. ‘I should have gone on with Sally. Better
go with the tide and make the best of its course than stem it at the risk of a
capsize.’ But he kept these unmelodious thoughts to himself, and was
outwardly considerate and kind.
</p>
<p>
This somewhat barren tract of his life had extended to less than a year and a
half when his ponderings were cut short by the loss of the woman they
concerned. When she was in her grave he thought better of her than when she had
been alive; the farm was a worse place without her than with her, after all. No
woman short of divine could have gone through such an experience as hers with
her first husband without becoming a little soured. Her stagnant sympathies,
her sometimes unreasonable manner, had covered a heart frank and well meaning,
and originally hopeful and warm. She left him a tiny red infant in white
wrappings. To make life as easy as possible to this touching object became at
once his care.
</p>
<p>
As this child learnt to walk and talk Darton learnt to see feasibility in a
scheme which pleased him. Revolving the experiment which he had hitherto made
upon life, he fancied he had gained wisdom from his mistakes and caution from
his miscarriages.
</p>
<p>
What the scheme was needs no penetration to discover. Once more he had
opportunity to recast and rectify his ill-wrought situations by returning to
Sally Hall, who still lived quietly on under her mother’s roof at
Hintock. Helena had been a woman to lend pathos and refinement to a home; Sally
was the woman to brighten it. She would not, as Helena did, despise the rural
simplicities of a farmer’s fireside. Moreover, she had a pre-eminent
qualification for Darton’s household; no other woman could make so
desirable a mother to her brother’s two children and Darton’s one
as Sally—while Darton, now that Helena had gone, was a more promising
husband for Sally than he had ever been when liable to reminders from an
uncured sentimental wound.
</p>
<p>
Darton was not a man to act rapidly, and the working out of his reparative
designs might have been delayed for some time. But there came a winter evening
precisely like the one which had darkened over that former ride to Hintock, and
he asked himself why he should postpone longer, when the very landscape called
for a repetition of that attempt.
</p>
<p>
He told his man to saddle the mare, booted and spurred himself with a younger
horseman’s nicety, kissed the two youngest children, and rode off. To
make the journey a complete parallel to the first, he would fain have had his
old acquaintance Japheth Johns with him. But Johns, alas! was missing. His
removal to the other side of the county had left unrepaired the breach which
had arisen between him and Darton; and though Darton had forgiven him a hundred
times, as Johns had probably forgiven Darton, the effort of reunion in present
circumstances was one not likely to be made.
</p>
<p>
He screwed himself up to as cheerful a pitch as he could without his former
crony, and became content with his own thoughts as he rode, instead of the
words of a companion. The sun went down; the boughs appeared scratched in like
an etching against the sky; old crooked men with faggots at their backs said
‘Good-night, sir,’ and Darton replied ‘Good-night’
right heartily.
</p>
<p>
By the time he reached the forking roads it was getting as dark as it had been
on the occasion when Johns climbed the directing-post. Darton made no mistake
this time. ‘Nor shall I be able to mistake, thank Heaven, when I
arrive,’ he murmured. It gave him peculiar satisfaction to think that the
proposed marriage, like his first, was of the nature of setting in order things
long awry, and not a momentary freak of fancy.
</p>
<p>
Nothing hindered the smoothness of his journey, which seemed not half its
former length. Though dark, it was only between five and six o’clock when
the bulky chimneys of Mrs. Hall’s residence appeared in view behind the
sycamore-tree. On second thoughts he retreated and put up at the ale-house as
in former time; and when he had plumed himself before the inn mirror, called
for something to drink, and smoothed out the incipient wrinkles of care, he
walked on to the Knap with a quick step.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER V</h3>
<p>
That evening Sally was making ‘pinners’ for the milkers, who were
now increased by two, for her mother and herself no longer joined in milking
the cows themselves. But upon the whole there was little change in the
household economy, and not much in its appearance, beyond such minor
particulars as that the crack over the window, which had been a hundred years
coming, was a trifle wider; that the beams were a shade blacker; that the
influence of modernism had supplanted the open chimney corner by a grate; that
Rebekah, who had worn a cap when she had plenty of hair, had left it off now
she had scarce any, because it was reported that caps were not fashionable; and
that Sally’s face had naturally assumed a more womanly and experienced
cast.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall was actually lifting coals with the tongs, as she had used to do.
</p>
<p>
‘Five years ago this very night, if I am not mistaken—’ she
said, laying on an ember.
</p>
<p>
‘Not this very night—though ’twas one night this week,’
said the correct Sally.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, ’tis near enough. Five years ago Mr. Darton came to marry
you, and my poor boy Phil came home to die.’ She sighed. ‘Ah,
Sally,’ she presently said, ‘if you had managed well Mr. Darton
would have had you, Helena or none.’
</p>
<p>
‘Don’t be sentimental about that, mother,’ begged Sally.
‘I didn’t care to manage well in such a case. Though I liked him, I
wasn’t so anxious. I would never have married the man in the midst of
such a hitch as that was,’ she added with decision; ‘and I
don’t think I would if he were to ask me now.’
</p>
<p>
‘I am not sure about that, unless you have another in your eye.’
</p>
<p>
‘I wouldn’t; and I’ll tell you why. I could hardly marry him
for love at this time o’ day. And as we’ve quite enough to live on
if we give up the dairy to-morrow, I should have no need to marry for any
meaner reason . . . I am quite happy enough as I am, and there’s an end
of it.’
</p>
<p>
Now it was not long after this dialogue that there came a mild rap at the door,
and in a moment there entered Rebekah, looking as though a ghost had arrived.
The fact was that that accomplished skimmer and churner (now a resident in the
house) had overheard the desultory observations between mother and daughter,
and on opening the door to Mr. Darton thought the coincidence must have a
grisly meaning in it. Mrs. Hall welcomed the farmer with warm surprise, as did
Sally, and for a moment they rather wanted words.
</p>
<p>
‘Can you push up the chimney-crook for me, Mr Darton? the notches
hitch,’ said the matron. He did it, and the homely little act bridged
over the awkward consciousness that he had been a stranger for four years.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Hall soon saw what he had come for, and left the principals together while
she went to prepare him a late tea, smiling at Sally’s recent hasty
assertions of indifference, when she saw how civil Sally was. When tea was
ready she joined them. She fancied that Darton did not look so confident as
when he had arrived; but Sally was quite light-hearted, and the meal passed
pleasantly.
</p>
<p>
About seven he took his leave of them. Mrs. Hall went as far as the door to
light him down the slope. On the doorstep he said frankly—‘I came
to ask your daughter to marry me; chose the night and everything, with an eye
to a favourable answer. But she won’t.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then she’s a very ungrateful girl!’ emphatically said Mrs.
Hall.
</p>
<p>
Darton paused to shape his sentence, and asked, ‘I—I suppose
there’s nobody else more favoured?’
</p>
<p>
‘I can’t say that there is, or that there isn’t,’
answered Mrs. Hall. ‘She’s private in some things. I’m on
your side, however, Mr. Darton, and I’ll talk to her.’
</p>
<p>
‘Thank ‘ee, thank ‘ee!’ said the farmer in a gayer
accent; and with this assurance the not very satisfactory visit came to an end.
Darton descended the roots of the sycamore, the light was withdrawn, and the
door closed. At the bottom of the slope he nearly ran against a man about to
ascend.
</p>
<p>
‘Can a jack-o’-lent believe his few senses on such a dark night, or
can’t he?’ exclaimed one whose utterance Darton recognized in a
moment, despite its unexpectedness. ‘I dare not swear he can, though I
fain would!’ The speaker was Johns.
</p>
<p>
Darton said he was glad of this opportunity, bad as it was, of putting an end
to the silence of years, and asked the dairyman what he was travelling that way
for.
</p>
<p>
Japheth showed the old jovial confidence in a moment. ‘I’m going to
see your—relations—as they always seem to me,’ he
said—‘Mrs. Hall and Sally. Well, Charles, the fact is I find the
natural barbarousness of man is much increased by a bachelor life, and, as your
leavings were always good enough for me, I’m trying civilization
here.’ He nodded towards the house.
</p>
<p>
‘Not with Sally—to marry her?’ said Darton, feeling something
like a rill of ice water between his shoulders.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, by the help of Providence and my personal charms. And I think I
shall get her. I am this road every week—my present dairy is only four
miles off, you know, and I see her through the window. ’Tis rather odd
that I was going to speak practical to-night to her for the first time.
You’ve just called?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, for a short while. But she didn’t say a word about
you.’
</p>
<p>
‘A good sign, a good sign. Now that decides me. I’ll swing the
mallet and get her answer this very night as I planned.’
</p>
<p>
A few more remarks, and Darton, wishing his friend joy of Sally in a slightly
hollow tone of jocularity, bade him good-bye. Johns promised to write
particulars, and ascended, and was lost in the shade of the house and tree. A
rectangle of light appeared when Johns was admitted, and all was dark again.
</p>
<p>
‘Happy Japheth!’ said Darton. ‘This then is the
explanation!’
</p>
<p>
He determined to return home that night. In a quarter of an hour he passed out
of the village, and the next day went about his swede-lifting and storing as if
nothing had occurred.
</p>
<p>
He waited and waited to hear from Johns whether the wedding-day was fixed: but
no letter came. He learnt not a single particular till, meeting Johns one day
at a horse-auction, Darton exclaimed genially—rather more genially than
he felt—‘When is the joyful day to be?’
</p>
<p>
To his great surprise a reciprocity of gladness was not conspicuous in Johns.
‘Not at all,’ he said, in a very subdued tone. ‘’Tis a
bad job; she won’t have me.’
</p>
<p>
Darton held his breath till he said with treacherous solicitude, ‘Try
again—’tis coyness.’
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ said Johns decisively. ‘There’s been none of
that. We talked it over dozens of times in the most fair and square way. She
tells me plainly, I don’t suit her. ’Twould be simply annoying her
to ask her again. Ah, Charles, you threw a prize away when you let her slip
five years ago.’
</p>
<p>
‘I did—I did,’ said Darton.
</p>
<p>
He returned from that auction with a new set of feelings in play. He had
certainly made a surprising mistake in thinking Johns his successful rival. It
really seemed as if he might hope for Sally after all.
</p>
<p>
This time, being rather pressed by business, Darton had recourse to
pen-and-ink, and wrote her as manly and straightforward a proposal as any woman
could wish to receive. The reply came promptly:-
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘DEAR MR. DARTON,—I am as sensible as any woman can be of the
goodness that leads you to make me this offer a second time. Better women than
I would be proud of the honour, for when I read your nice long speeches on
mangold-wurzel, and such like topics, at the Casterbridge Farmers’ Club,
I do feel it an honour, I assure you. But my answer is just the same as before.
I will not try to explain what, in truth, I cannot explain—my reasons; I
will simply say that I must decline to be married to you. With good wishes as
in former times, I am, your faithful friend,
</p>
<p class="right">
‘SALLY HALL.’
</p>
<p>
Darton dropped the letter hopelessly. Beyond the negative, there was just a
possibility of sarcasm in it—‘nice long speeches on
mangold-wurzel’ had a suspicious sound. However, sarcasm or none, there
was the answer, and he had to be content.
</p>
<p>
He proceeded to seek relief in a business which at this time engrossed much of
his attention—that of clearing up a curious mistake just current in the
county, that he had been nearly ruined by the recent failure of a local bank. A
farmer named Darton had lost heavily, and the similarity of name had probably
led to the error. Belief in it was so persistent that it demanded several days
of letter-writing to set matters straight, and persuade the world that he was
as solvent as ever he had been in his life. He had hardly concluded this
worrying task when, to his delight, another letter arrived in the handwriting
of Sally.
</p>
<p>
Darton tore it open; it was very short.
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘DEAR MR. DARTON,—We have been so alarmed these last few days by
the report that you were ruined by the stoppage of —‘s Bank, that,
now it is contradicted I hasten, by my mother’s wish, to say how truly
glad we are to find there is no foundation for the report. After your kindness
to my poor brother’s children, I can do no less than write at such a
moment. We had a letter from each of them a few days ago.—Your faithful
friend,
</p>
<p class="right">
‘SALLY HALL.’
</p>
<p>
‘Mercenary little woman!’ said Darton to himself with a smile.
‘Then that was the secret of her refusal this time—she thought I
was ruined.’
</p>
<p>
Now, such was Darton, that as hours went on he could not help feeling too
generously towards Sally to condemn her in this. What did he want in a wife? he
asked himself. Love and integrity. What next? Worldly wisdom. And was there
really more than worldly wisdom in her refusal to go aboard a sinking ship? She
now knew it was otherwise. ‘Begad,’ he said, ‘I’ll try
her again.’
</p>
<p>
The fact was he had so set his heart upon Sally, and Sally alone, that nothing
was to be allowed to baulk him; and his reasoning was purely formal.
</p>
<p>
Anniversaries having been unpropitious, he waited on till a bright day late in
May—a day when all animate nature was fancying, in its trusting, foolish
way, that it was going to bask out of doors for evermore. As he rode through
Long-Ash Lane it was scarce recognizable as the track of his two winter
journeys. No mistake could be made now, even with his eyes shut. The
cuckoo’s note was at its best, between April tentativeness and midsummer
decrepitude, and the reptiles in the sun behaved as winningly as kittens on a
hearth. Though afternoon, and about the same time as on the last occasion, it
was broad day and sunshine when he entered Hintock, and the details of the Knap
dairy-house were visible far up the road. He saw Sally in the garden, and was
set vibrating. He had first intended to go on to the inn; but ‘No,’
he said; ‘I’ll tie my horse to the garden-gate. If all goes well it
can soon be taken round: if not, I mount and ride away’
</p>
<p>
The tall shade of the horseman darkened the room in which Mrs. Hall sat, and
made her start, for he had ridden by a side path to the top of the slope, where
riders seldom came. In a few seconds he was in the garden with Sally.
</p>
<p>
Five—ay, three minutes—did the business at the back of that row of
bees. Though spring had come, and heavenly blue consecrated the scene, Darton
succeeded not. ‘<i>No</i>,’ said Sally firmly. ‘I will never,
never marry you, Mr. Darton. I would have done it once; but now I never
can.’
</p>
<p>
‘But!’—implored Mr. Darton. And with a burst of real
eloquence he went on to declare all sorts of things that he would do for her.
He would drive her to see her mother every week—take her to
London—settle so much money upon her—Heaven knows what he did not
promise, suggest, and tempt her with. But it availed nothing. She interposed
with a stout negative, which closed the course of his argument like an iron
gate across a highway. Darton paused.
</p>
<p>
‘Then,’ said he simply, ‘you hadn’t heard of my
supposed failure when you declined last time?’
</p>
<p>
‘I had not,’ she said. ‘But if I had ’twould have been
all the same.’
</p>
<p>
‘And ’tis not because of any soreness from my slighting you years
ago?’
</p>
<p>
‘No. That soreness is long past.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah—then you despise me, Sally?’
</p>
<p>
‘No,’ she slowly answered. ‘I don’t altogether despise
you. I don’t think you quite such a hero as I once did—that’s
all. The truth is, I am happy enough as I am; and I don’t mean to marry
at all. Now, may <i>I</i> ask a favour, sir?’ She spoke with an ineffable
charm, which, whenever he thought of it, made him curse his loss of her as long
as he lived.
</p>
<p>
‘To any extent.’
</p>
<p>
‘Please do not put this question to me any more. Friends as long as you
like, but lovers and married never.’
</p>
<p>
‘I never will,’ said Darton. ‘Not if I live a hundred
years.’
</p>
<p>
And he never did. That he had worn out his welcome in her heart was only too
plain.
</p>
<p>
When his step-children had grown up, and were placed out in life, all
communication between Darton and the Hall family ceased. It was only by chance
that, years after, he learnt that Sally, notwithstanding the solicitations her
attractions drew down upon her, had refused several offers of marriage, and
steadily adhered to her purpose of leading a single life
</p>
<p class="p2">
May 1884.
</p>
</div><!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2><a id="chap07"/>THE DISTRACTED PREACHER</h2>
<h3>CHAPTER I—HOW HIS COLD WAS CURED</h3>
<p>
Something delayed the arrival of the Wesleyan minister, and a young man came
temporarily in his stead. It was on the thirteenth of January 183- that Mr.
Stockdale, the young man in question, made his humble entry into the village,
unknown, and almost unseen. But when those of the inhabitants who styled
themselves of his connection became acquainted with him, they were rather
pleased with the substitute than otherwise, though he had scarcely as yet
acquired ballast of character sufficient to steady the consciences of the
hundred-and-forty Methodists of pure blood who, at this time, lived in
Nether-Moynton, and to give in addition supplementary support to the mixed race
which went to church in the morning and chapel in the evening, or when there
was a tea—as many as a hundred-and-ten people more, all told, and
including the parish-clerk in the winter-time, when it was too dark for the
vicar to observe who passed up the street at seven o’clock—which,
to be just to him, he was never anxious to do.
</p>
<p>
It was owing to this overlapping of creeds that the celebrated
population-puzzle arose among the denser gentry of the district around
Nether-Moynton: how could it be that a parish containing fifteen score of
strong full-grown Episcopalians, and nearly thirteen score of well-matured
Dissenters, numbered barely two-and-twenty score adults in all?
</p>
<p>
The young man being personally interesting, those with whom he came in contact
were content to waive for a while the graver question of his sufficiency. It is
said that at this time of his life his eyes were affectionate, though without a
ray of levity; that his hair was curly, and his figure tall; that he was, in
short, a very lovable youth, who won upon his female hearers as soon as they
saw and heard him, and caused them to say, ‘Why didn’t we know of
this before he came, that we might have gied him a warmer welcome!’
</p>
<p>
The fact was that, knowing him to be only provisionally selected, and expecting
nothing remarkable in his person or doctrine, they and the rest of his flock in
Nether-Moynton had felt almost as indifferent about his advent as if they had
been the soundest church-going parishioners in the country, and he their true
and appointed parson. Thus when Stockdale set foot in the place nobody had
secured a lodging for him, and though his journey had given him a bad cold in
the head, he was forced to attend to that business himself. On inquiry he
learnt that the only possible accommodation in the village would be found at
the house of one Mrs. Lizzy Newberry, at the upper end of the street.
</p>
<p>
It was a youth who gave this information, and Stockdale asked him who Mrs.
Newberry might be.
</p>
<p>
The boy said that she was a widow-woman, who had got no husband, because he was
dead. Mr. Newberry, he added, had been a well-to-do man enough, as the saying
was, and a farmer; but he had gone off in a decline. As regarded Mrs.
Newberry’s serious side, Stockdale gathered that she was one of the
trimmers who went to church and chapel both.
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll go there,’ said Stockdale, feeling that, in the absence
of purely sectarian lodgings, he could do no better.
</p>
<p>
‘She’s a little particular, and won’t hae gover’ment
folks, or curates, or the pa’son’s friends, or such like,’
said the lad dubiously.
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, that may be a promising sign: I’ll call. Or no; just you go up
and ask first if she can find room for me. I have to see one or two persons on
another matter. You will find me down at the carrier’s.’
</p>
<p>
In a quarter of an hour the lad came back, and said that Mrs. Newberry would
have no objection to accommodate him, whereupon Stockdale called at the house.
</p>
<p>
It stood within a garden-hedge, and seemed to be roomy and comfortable. He saw
an elderly woman, with whom he made arrangements to come the same night, since
there was no inn in the place, and he wished to house himself as soon as
possible; the village being a local centre from which he was to radiate at once
to the different small chapels in the neighbourhood. He forthwith sent his
luggage to Mrs. Newberry’s from the carrier’s, where he had taken
shelter, and in the evening walked up to his temporary home.
</p>
<p>
As he now lived there, Stockdale felt it unnecessary to knock at the door; and
entering quietly he had the pleasure of hearing footsteps scudding away like
mice into the back quarters. He advanced to the parlour, as the front room was
called, though its stone floor was scarcely disguised by the carpet, which only
over-laid the trodden areas, leaving sandy deserts under the bulging mouldings
of the table-legs, playing with brass furniture. But the room looked snug and
cheerful. The firelight shone out brightly, trembling on the knobs and handles,
and lurking in great strength on the under surface of the chimney-piece. A deep
arm-chair, covered with horsehair, and studded with a countless throng of brass
nails, was pulled up on one side of the fireplace. The tea-things were on the
table, the teapot cover was open, and a little hand-bell had been laid at that
precise point towards which a person seated in the great chair might be
expected instinctively to stretch his hand.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale sat down, not objecting to his experience of the room thus far, and
began his residence by tinkling the bell. A little girl crept in at the
summons, and made tea for him. Her name, she said, was Marther Sarer, and she
lived out there, nodding towards the road and village generally. Before
Stockdale had got far with his meal, a tap sounded on the door behind him, and
on his telling the inquirer to come in, a rustle of garments caused him to turn
his head. He saw before him a fine and extremely well-made young woman, with
dark hair, a wide, sensible, beautiful forehead, eyes that warmed him before he
knew it, and a mouth that was in itself a picture to all appreciative souls.
</p>
<p>
‘Can I get you anything else for tea?’ she said, coming forward a
step or two, an expression of liveliness on her features, and her hand waving
the door by its edge.
</p>
<p>
‘Nothing, thank you,’ said Stockdale, thinking less of what he
replied than of what might be her relation to the household.
</p>
<p>
‘You are quite sure?’ said the young woman, apparently aware that
he had not considered his answer.
</p>
<p>
He conscientiously examined the tea-things, and found them all there.
‘Quite sure, Miss Newberry,’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘It is Mrs. Newberry,’ she said. ‘Lizzy Newberry, I used to
be Lizzy Simpkins.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, I beg your pardon, Mrs. Newberry.’ And before he had occasion
to say more she left the room.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale remained in some doubt till Martha Sarah came to clear the table.
‘Whose house is this, my little woman,’ said he.
</p>
<p>
‘Mrs. Lizzy Newberry’s, sir.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then Mrs. Newberry is not the old lady I saw this afternoon?’
</p>
<p>
‘No. That’s Mrs. Newberry’s mother. It was Mrs. Newberry who
comed in to you just by now, because she wanted to see if you was
good-looking.’
</p>
<p>
Later in the evening, when Stockdale was about to begin supper, she came again.
‘I have come myself, Mr. Stockdale,’ she said. The minister stood
up in acknowledgment of the honour. ‘I am afraid little Marther might not
make you understand. What will you have for supper?—there’s cold
rabbit, and there’s a ham uncut.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale said he could get on nicely with those viands, and supper was laid.
He had no more than cut a slice when tap-tap came to the door again. The
minister had already learnt that this particular rhythm in taps denoted the
fingers of his enkindling landlady, and the doomed young fellow buried his
first mouthful under a look of receptive blandness.
</p>
<p>
‘We have a chicken in the house, Mr. Stockdale—I quite forgot to
mention it just now. Perhaps you would like Marther Sarer to bring it
up?’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale had advanced far enough in the art of being a young man to say that
he did not want the chicken, unless she brought it up herself; but when it was
uttered he blushed at the daring gallantry of the speech, perhaps a shade too
strong for a serious man and a minister. In three minutes the chicken appeared,
but, to his great surprise, only in the hands of Martha Sarah. Stockdale was
disappointed, which perhaps it was intended that he should be.
</p>
<p>
He had finished supper, and was not in the least anticipating Mrs. Newberry
again that night, when she tapped and entered as before. Stockdale’s
gratified look told that she had lost nothing by not appearing when expected.
It happened that the cold in the head from which the young man suffered had
increased with the approach of night, and before she had spoken he was seized
with a violent fit of sneezing which he could not anyhow repress.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Newberry looked full of pity. ‘Your cold is very bad to-night, Mr.
Stockdale.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale replied that it was rather troublesome.
</p>
<p>
‘And I’ve a good mind’—she added archly, looking at the
cheerless glass of water on the table, which the abstemious minister was going
to drink.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, Mrs. Newberry?’
</p>
<p>
‘I’ve a good mind that you should have something more likely to
cure it than that cold stuff.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well,’ said Stockdale, looking down at the glass, ‘as there
is no inn here, and nothing better to be got in the village, of course it will
do.’
</p>
<p>
To this she replied, ‘There is something better, not far off, though not
in the house. I really think you must try it, or you may be ill. Yes, Mr.
Stockdale, you shall.’ She held up her finger, seeing that he was about
to speak. ‘Don’t ask what it is; wait, and you shall see.’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy went away, and Stockdale waited in a pleasant mood. Presently she
returned with her bonnet and cloak on, saying, ‘I am so sorry, but you
must help me to get it. Mother has gone to bed. Will you wrap yourself up, and
come this way, and please bring that cup with you?’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale, a lonely young fellow, who had for weeks felt a great craving for
somebody on whom to throw away superfluous interest, and even tenderness, was
not sorry to join her; and followed his guide through the back door, across the
garden, to the bottom, where the boundary was a wall. This wall was low, and
beyond it Stockdale discerned in the night shades several grey headstones, and
the outlines of the church roof and tower.
</p>
<p>
‘It is easy to get up this way,’ she said, stepping upon a bank
which abutted on the wall; then putting her foot on the top of the stonework,
and descending a spring inside, where the ground was much higher, as is the
manner of graveyards to be. Stockdale did the same, and followed her in the
dusk across the irregular ground till they came to the tower door, which, when
they had entered, she softly closed behind them.
</p>
<p>
‘You can keep a secret?’ she said, in a musical voice.
</p>
<p>
‘Like an iron chest!’ said he fervently.
</p>
<p>
Then from under her cloak she produced a small lighted lantern, which the
minister had not noticed that she carried at all. The light showed them to be
close to the singing-gallery stairs, under which lay a heap of lumber of all
sorts, but consisting mostly of decayed framework, pews, panels, and pieces of
flooring, that from time to time had been removed from their original fixings
in the body of the edifice and replaced by new.
</p>
<p>
‘Perhaps you will drag some of those boards aside?’ she said,
holding the lantern over her head to light him better. ‘Or will you take
the lantern while I move them?’
</p>
<p>
‘I can manage it,’ said the young man, and acting as she ordered,
he uncovered, to his surprise, a row of little barrels bound with wood hoops,
each barrel being about as large as the nave of a heavy waggon-wheel.
</p>
<p>
When they were laid open Lizzy fixed her eyes on him, as if she wondered what
he would say.
</p>
<p>
‘You know what they are?’ she asked, finding that he did not speak.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, barrels,’ said Stockdale simply. He was an inland man, the
son of highly respectable parents, and brought up with a single eye to the
ministry; and the sight suggested nothing beyond the fact that such articles
were there.
</p>
<p>
‘You are quite right, they are barrels,’ she said, in an emphatic
tone of candour that was not without a touch of irony.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale looked at her with an eye of sudden misgiving. ‘Not
smugglers’ liquor?’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said she. ‘They are tubs of spirit that have
accidentally come over in the dark from France.’
</p>
<p>
In Nether-Moynton and its vicinity at this date people always smiled at the
sort of sin called in the outside world illicit trading; and these little kegs
of gin and brandy were as well known to the inhabitants as turnips. So that
Stockdale’s innocent ignorance, and his look of alarm when he guessed the
sinister mystery, seemed to strike Lizzy first as ludicrous, and then as very
awkward for the good impression that she wished to produce upon him.
</p>
<p>
‘Smuggling is carried on here by some of the people,’ she said in a
gentle, apologetic voice. ‘It has been their practice for generations,
and they think it no harm. Now, will you roll out one of the tubs?’
</p>
<p>
‘What to do with it?’ said the minister.
</p>
<p>
‘To draw a little from it to cure your cold,’ she answered.
‘It is so ‘nation strong that it drives away that sort of thing in
a jiffy. O, it is all right about our taking it. I may have what I like; the
owner of the tubs says so. I ought to have had some in the house, and then I
shouldn’t ha’ been put to this trouble; but I drink none myself,
and so I often forget to keep it indoors.’
</p>
<p>
‘You are allowed to help yourself, I suppose, that you may not inform
where their hiding-place is?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, no; not that particularly; but I may take any if I want it. So
help yourself.’
</p>
<p>
‘I will, to oblige you, since you have a right to it,’ murmured the
minister; and though he was not quite satisfied with his part in the
performance, he rolled one of the ‘tubs’ out from the corner into
the middle of the tower floor. ‘How do you wish me to get it
out—with a gimlet, I suppose?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, I’ll show you,’ said his interesting companion; and she
held up with her other hand a shoemaker’s awl and a hammer. ‘You
must never do these things with a gimlet, because the wood-dust gets in; and
when the buyers pour out the brandy that would tell them that the tub had been
broached. An awl makes no dust, and the hole nearly closes up again. Now tap
one of the hoops forward.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale took the hammer and did so.
</p>
<p>
‘Now make the hole in the part that was covered by the hoop.’
</p>
<p>
He made the hole as directed. ‘It won’t run out,’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘O yes it will,’ said she. ‘Take the tub between your knees,
and squeeze the heads; and I’ll hold the cup.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale obeyed; and the pressure taking effect upon the tub, which seemed, to
be thin, the spirit spirted out in a stream. When the cup was full he ceased
pressing, and the flow immediately stopped. ‘Now we must fill up the keg
with water,’ said Lizzy, ‘or it will cluck like forty hens when it
is handled, and show that ’tis not full.’
</p>
<p>
‘But they tell you you may take it?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, the <i>smugglers</i>: but the <i>buyers</i> must not know that the
smugglers have been kind to me at their expense.’
</p>
<p>
‘I see,’ said Stockdale doubtfully. ‘I much question the
honesty of this proceeding.’
</p>
<p>
By her direction he held the tub with the hole upwards, and while he went
through the process of alternately pressing and ceasing to press, she produced
a bottle of water, from which she took mouthfuls, conveying each to the keg by
putting her pretty lips to the hole, where it was sucked in at each recovery of
the cask from pressure. When it was again full he plugged the hole, knocked the
hoop down to its place, and buried the tub in the lumber as before.
</p>
<p>
‘Aren’t the smugglers afraid that you will tell?’ he asked,
as they recrossed the churchyard.
</p>
<p>
‘O no; they are not afraid of that. I couldn’t do such a
thing.’
</p>
<p>
‘They have put you into a very awkward corner,’ said Stockdale
emphatically. ‘You must, of course, as an honest person, sometimes feel
that it is your duty to inform—really you must.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I have never particularly felt it as a duty; and, besides, my
first husband—’ She stopped, and there was some confusion in her
voice. Stockdale was so honest and unsophisticated that he did not at once
discern why she paused: but at last he did perceive that the words were a slip,
and that no woman would have uttered ‘first husband’ by accident
unless she had thought pretty frequently of a second. He felt for her
confusion, and allowed her time to recover and proceed. ‘My
husband,’ she said, in a self-corrected tone, ‘used to know of
their doings, and so did my father, and kept the secret. I cannot inform, in
fact, against anybody.’
</p>
<p>
‘I see the hardness of it,’ he continued, like a man who looked far
into the moral of things. ‘And it is very cruel that you should be tossed
and tantalized between your memories and your conscience. I do hope, Mrs.
Newberry, that you will soon see your way out of this unpleasant
position.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I don’t just now,’ she murmured.
</p>
<p>
By this time they had passed over the wall and entered the house, where she
brought him a glass and hot water, and left him to his own reflections. He
looked after her vanishing form, asking himself whether he, as a respectable
man, and a minister, and a shining light, even though as yet only of the
halfpenny-candle sort, were quite justified in doing this thing. A sneeze
settled the question; and he found that when the fiery liquor was lowered by
the addition of twice or thrice the quantity of water, it was one of the
prettiest cures for a cold in the head that he had ever known, particularly at
this chilly time of the year.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale sat in the deep chair about twenty minutes sipping and meditating,
till he at length took warmer views of things, and longed for the morrow, when
he would see Mrs. Newberry again. He then felt that, though chronologically at
a short distance, it would in an emotional sense be very long before to-morrow
came, and walked restlessly round the room. His eye was attracted by a framed
and glazed sampler in which a running ornament of fir-trees and peacocks
surrounded the following pretty bit of sentiment:-
</p>
<p class="poem">
‘Rose-leaves smell when roses thrive,<br/>
Here’s my work while I’m alive;<br/>
Rose-leaves smell when shrunk and shed,<br/>
Here’s my work when I am dead.
</p>
<p class="letter">
‘Lizzy Simpkins. Fear God. Honour the King.<br/>
    ‘Aged 11 years.
</p>
<p>
‘’Tis hers,’ he said to himself. ‘Heavens, how I like
that name!’
</p>
<p>
Before he had done thinking that no other name from Abigail to Zenobia would
have suited his young landlady so well, tap-tap came again upon the door; and
the minister started as her face appeared yet another time, looking so
disinterested that the most ingenious would have refrained from asserting that
she had come to affect his feelings by her seductive eyes.
</p>
<p>
‘Would you like a fire in your room, Mr. Stockdale, on account of your
cold?’
</p>
<p>
The minister, being still a little pricked in the conscience for countenancing
her in watering the spirits, saw here a way to self-chastisement. ‘No, I
thank you,’ he said firmly; ‘it is not necessary. I have never been
used to one in my life, and it would be giving way to luxury too far.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then I won’t insist,’ she said, and disconcerted him by
vanishing instantly.
</p>
<p>
Wondering if she was vexed by his refusal, he wished that he had chosen to have
a fire, even though it should have scorched him out of bed and endangered his
self-discipline for a dozen days. However, he consoled himself with what was in
truth a rare consolation for a budding lover, that he was under the same roof
with Lizzy; her guest, in fact, to take a poetical view of the term lodger; and
that he would certainly see her on the morrow.
</p>
<p>
The morrow came, and Stockdale rose early, his cold quite gone. He had never in
his life so longed for the breakfast hour as he did that day, and punctually at
eight o’clock, after a short walk, to reconnoitre the premises, he
re-entered the door of his dwelling. Breakfast passed, and Martha Sarah
attended, but nobody came voluntarily as on the night before to inquire if
there were other wants which he had not mentioned, and which she would attempt
to gratify. He was disappointed, and went out, hoping to see her at dinner.
Dinner time came; he sat down to the meal, finished it, lingered on for a whole
hour, although two new teachers were at that moment waiting at the chapel-door
to speak to him by appointment. It was useless to wait longer, and he slowly
went his way down the lane, cheered by the thought that, after all, he would
see her in the evening, and perhaps engage again in the delightful
tub-broaching in the neighbouring church tower, which proceeding he resolved to
render more moral by steadfastly insisting that no water should be introduced
to fill up, though the tub should cluck like all the hens in Christendom. But
nothing could disguise the fact that it was a queer business; and his
countenance fell when he thought how much more his mind was interested in that
matter than in his serious duties.
</p>
<p>
However, compunction vanished with the decline of day. Night came, and his tea
and supper; but no Lizzy Newberry, and no sweet temptations. At last the
minister could bear it no longer, and said to his quaint little attendant,
‘Where is Mrs. Newberry to-day?’ judiciously handing a penny as he
spoke.
</p>
<p>
‘She’s busy,’ said Martha.
</p>
<p>
‘Anything serious happened?’ he asked, handing another penny, and
revealing yet additional pennies in the background.
</p>
<p>
‘O no—nothing at all!’ said she, with breathless confidence.
‘Nothing ever happens to her. She’s only biding upstairs in bed
because ’tis her way sometimes.’
</p>
<p>
Being a young man of some honour, he would not question further, and assuming
that Lizzy must have a bad headache, or other slight ailment, in spite of what
the girl had said, he went to bed dissatisfied, not even setting eyes on old
Mrs. Simpkins. ‘I said last night that I should see her to-morrow,’
he reflected; ‘but that was not to be!’
</p>
<p>
Next day he had better fortune, or worse, meeting her at the foot of the stairs
in the morning, and being favoured by a visit or two from her during the
day—once for the purpose of making kindly inquiries about his comfort, as
on the first evening, and at another time to place a bunch of winter-violets on
his table, with a promise to renew them when they drooped. On these occasions
there was something in her smile which showed how conscious she was of the
effect she produced, though it must be said that it was rather a humorous than
a designing consciousness, and savoured more of pride than of vanity.
</p>
<p>
As for Stockdale, he clearly perceived that he possessed unlimited capacity for
backsliding, and wished that tutelary saints were not denied to Dissenters. He
set a watch upon his tongue and eyes for the space of one hour and a half,
after which he found it was useless to struggle further, and gave himself up to
the situation. ‘The other minister will be here in a month,’ he
said to himself when sitting over the fire. ‘Then I shall be off, and she
will distract my mind no more! . . . And then, shall I go on living by myself
for ever? No; when my two years of probation are finished, I shall have a
furnished house to live in, with a varnished door and a brass knocker; and
I’ll march straight back to her, and ask her flat, as soon as the last
plate is on the dresser!
</p>
<p>
Thus a titillating fortnight was passed by young Stockdale, during which time
things proceeded much as such matters have done ever since the beginning of
history. He saw the object of attachment several times one day, did not see her
at all the next, met her when he least expected to do so, missed her when hints
and signs as to where she should be at a given hour almost amounted to an
appointment. This mild coquetry was perhaps fair enough under the circumstances
of their being so closely lodged, and Stockdale put up with it as
philosophically as he was able. Being in her own house, she could, after vexing
him or disappointing him of her presence, easily win him back by suddenly
surrounding him with those little attentions which her position as his landlady
put it in her power to bestow. When he had waited indoors half the day to see
her, and on finding that she would not be seen, had gone off in a huff to the
dreariest and dampest walk he could discover, she would restore equilibrium in
the evening with ‘Mr. Stockdale, I have fancied you must feel draught
o’ nights from your bedroom window, and so I have been putting up thicker
curtains this afternoon while you were out;’ or, ‘I noticed that
you sneezed twice again this morning, Mr. Stockdale. Depend upon it that cold
is hanging about you yet; I am sure it is—I have thought of it
continually; and you must let me make a posset for you.’
</p>
<p>
Sometimes in coming home he found his sitting-room rearranged, chairs placed
where the table had stood, and the table ornamented with the few fresh flowers
and leaves that could be obtained at this season, so as to add a novelty to the
room. At times she would be standing on a chair outside the house, trying to
nail up a branch of the monthly rose which the winter wind had blown down; and
of course he stepped forward to assist her, when their hands got mixed in
passing the shreds and nails. Thus they became friends again after a
disagreement. She would utter on these occasions some pretty and deprecatory
remark on the necessity of her troubling him anew; and he would straightway say
that he would do a hundred times as much for her if she should so require.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II—HOW HE SAW TWO OTHER MEN</h3>
<p>
Matters being in this advancing state, Stockdale was rather surprised one
cloudy evening, while sitting in his room, at hearing her speak in low tones of
expostulation to some one at the door. It was nearly dark, but the shutters
were not yet closed, nor the candles lighted; and Stockdale was tempted to
stretch his head towards the window. He saw outside the door a young man in
clothes of a whitish colour, and upon reflection judged their wearer to be the
well-built and rather handsome miller who lived below. The miller’s voice
was alternately low and firm, and sometimes it reached the level of positive
entreaty; but what the words were Stockdale could in no way hear.
</p>
<p>
Before the colloquy had ended, the minister’s attention was attracted by
a second incident. Opposite Lizzy’s home grew a clump of laurels, forming
a thick and permanent shade. One of the laurel boughs now quivered against the
light background of sky, and in a moment the head of a man peered out, and
remained still. He seemed to be also much interested in the conversation at the
door, and was plainly lingering there to watch and listen. Had Stockdale stood
in any other relation to Lizzy than that of a lover, he might have gone out and
investigated the meaning of this: but being as yet but an unprivileged ally, he
did nothing more than stand up and show himself against the firelight,
whereupon the listener disappeared, and Lizzy and the miller spoke in lower
tones.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale was made so uneasy by the circumstance, that as soon as the miller
was gone, he said, ‘Mrs. Newberry, are you aware that you were watched
just now, and your conversation heard?’
</p>
<p>
‘When?’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘When you were talking to that miller. A man was looking from the
laurel-tree as jealously as if he could have eaten you.’
</p>
<p>
She showed more concern than the trifling event seemed to demand, and he added,
‘Perhaps you were talking of things you did not wish to be
overheard?’
</p>
<p>
‘I was talking only on business,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘Lizzy, be frank!’ said the young man. ‘If it was only on
business, why should anybody wish to listen to you?’
</p>
<p>
She looked curiously at him. ‘What else do you think it could be,
then?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well—the only talk between a young woman and man that is likely to
amuse an eavesdropper.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah yes,’ she said, smiling in spite of her preoccupation.
‘Well, my cousin Owlett has spoken to me about matrimony, every now and
then, that’s true; but he was not speaking of it then. I wish he had been
speaking of it, with all my heart. It would have been much less serious for
me.’
</p>
<p>
‘O Mrs. Newberry!’
</p>
<p>
‘It would. Not that I should ha’ chimed in with him, of course. I
wish it for other reasons. I am glad, Mr. Stockdale, that you have told me of
that listener. It is a timely warning, and I must see my cousin again.’
</p>
<p>
‘But don’t go away till I have spoken,’ said the minister.
‘I’ll out with it at once, and make no more ado. Let it be Yes or
No between us, Lizzy; please do!’ And he held out his hand, in which she
freely allowed her own to rest, but without speaking.
</p>
<p>
‘You mean Yes by that?’ he asked, after waiting a while.
</p>
<p>
‘You may be my sweetheart, if you will.’
</p>
<p>
‘Why not say at once you will wait for me until I have a house and can
come back to marry you.’
</p>
<p>
‘Because I am thinking—thinking of something else,’ she said
with embarrassment. ‘It all comes upon me at once, and I must settle one
thing at a time.’
</p>
<p>
‘At any rate, dear Lizzy, you can assure me that the miller shall not be
allowed to speak to you except on business? You have never directly encouraged
him?’
</p>
<p>
She parried the question by saying, ‘You see, he and his party have been
in the habit of leaving things on my premises sometimes, and as I have not
denied him, it makes him rather forward.’
</p>
<p>
‘Things—what things?’
</p>
<p>
‘Tubs—they are called Things here.’
</p>
<p>
‘But why don’t you deny him, my dear Lizzy?’
</p>
<p>
‘I cannot well.’
</p>
<p>
‘You are too timid. It is unfair of him to impose so upon you, and get
your good name into danger by his smuggling tricks. Promise me that the next
time he wants to leave his tubs here you will let me roll them into the
street?’
</p>
<p>
She shook her head. ‘I would not venture to offend the neighbours so much
as that,’ said she, ‘or do anything that would be so likely to put
poor Owlett into the hands of the excisemen.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale sighed, and said that he thought hers a mistaken generosity when it
extended to assisting those who cheated the king of his dues. ‘At any
rate, you will let me make him keep his distance as your lover, and tell him
flatly that you are not for him?’
</p>
<p>
‘Please not, at present,’ she said. ‘I don’t wish to
offend my old neighbours. It is not only Owlett who is concerned.’
</p>
<p>
‘This is too bad,’ said Stockdale impatiently.
</p>
<p>
‘On my honour, I won’t encourage him as my lover,’ Lizzy
answered earnestly. ‘A reasonable man will be satisfied with that.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, so I am,’ said Stockdale, his countenance clearing.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER III—THE MYSTERIOUS GREATCOAT</h3>
<p>
Stockdale now began to notice more particularly a feature in the life of his
fair landlady, which he had casually observed but scarcely ever thought of
before. It was that she was markedly irregular in her hours of rising. For a
week or two she would be tolerably punctual, reaching the ground-floor within a
few minutes of half-past seven. Then suddenly she would not be visible till
twelve at noon, perhaps for three or four days in succession; and twice he had
certain proof that she did not leave her room till half-past three in the
afternoon. The second time that this extreme lateness came under his notice was
on a day when he had particularly wished to consult with her about his future
movements; and he concluded, as he always had done, that she had a cold,
headache, or other ailment, unless she had kept herself invisible to avoid
meeting and talking to him, which he could hardly believe. The former
supposition was disproved, however, by her innocently saying, some days later,
when they were speaking on a question of health, that she had never had a
moment’s heaviness, headache, or illness of any kind since the previous
January twelvemonth.
</p>
<p>
‘I am glad to hear it,’ said he. ‘I thought quite
otherwise.’
</p>
<p>
‘What, do I look sickly?’ she asked, turning up her face to show
the impossibility of his gazing on it and holding such a belief for a moment.
</p>
<p>
‘Not at all; I merely thought so from your being sometimes obliged to
keep your room through the best part of the day.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, as for that—it means nothing,’ she murmured, with a look
which some might have called cold, and which was the worst look that he liked
to see upon her. ‘It is pure sleepiness, Mr. Stockdale.’
</p>
<p>
‘Never!’
</p>
<p>
‘It is, I tell you. When I stay in my room till half-past three in the
afternoon, you may always be sure that I slept soundly till three, or I
shouldn’t have stayed there.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is dreadful,’ said Stockdale, thinking of the disastrous
effects of such indulgence upon the household of a minister, should it become a
habit of everyday occurrence.
</p>
<p>
‘But then,’ she said, divining his good and prescient thoughts,
‘it only happens when I stay awake all night. I don’t go to sleep
till five or six in the morning sometimes.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, that’s another matter,’ said Stockdale.
‘Sleeplessness to such an alarming extent is real illness. Have you
spoken to a doctor?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no—there is no need for doing that—it is all natural to
me.’ And she went away without further remark.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale might have waited a long time to know the real cause of her
sleeplessness, had it not happened that one dark night he was sitting in his
bedroom jotting down notes for a sermon, which occupied him perfunctorily for a
considerable time after the other members of the household had retired. He did
not get to bed till one o’clock. Before he had fallen asleep he heard a
knocking at the front door, first rather timidly performed, and then louder.
Nobody answered it, and the person knocked again. As the house still remained
undisturbed, Stockdale got out of bed, went to his window, which overlooked the
door, and opening it, asked who was there.
</p>
<p>
A young woman’s voice replied that Susan Wallis was there, and that she
had come to ask if Mrs. Newberry could give her some mustard to make a plaster
with, as her father was taken very ill on the chest.
</p>
<p>
The minister, having neither bell nor servant, was compelled to act in person.
‘I will call Mrs. Newberry,’ he said. Partly dressing himself; he
went along the passage and tapped at Lizzy’s door. She did not answer,
and, thinking of her erratic habits in the matter of sleep, he thumped the door
persistently, when he discovered, by its moving ajar under his knocking, that
it had only been gently pushed to. As there was now a sufficient entry for the
voice, he knocked no longer, but said in firm tones, ‘Mrs. Newberry, you
are wanted.’
</p>
<p>
The room was quite silent; not a breathing, not a rustle, came from any part of
it. Stockdale now sent a positive shout through the open space of the door:
‘Mrs. Newberry!’—still no answer, or movement of any kind
within. Then he heard sounds from the opposite room, that of Lizzy’s
mother, as if she had been aroused by his uproar though Lizzy had not, and was
dressing herself hastily. Stockdale softly closed the younger woman’s
door and went on to the other, which was opened by Mrs. Simpkins before he
could reach it. She was in her ordinary clothes, and had a light in her hand.
</p>
<p>
‘What’s the person calling about?’ she said in alarm.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale told the girl’s errand, adding seriously, ‘I cannot wake
Mrs. Newberry.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is no matter,’ said her mother. ‘I can let the girl have
what she wants as well as my daughter.’ And she came out of the room and
went downstairs.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale retired towards his own apartment, saying, however, to Mrs. Simpkins
from the landing, as if on second thoughts, ‘I suppose there is nothing
the matter with Mrs. Newberry, that I could not wake her?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no,’ said the old lady hastily. ‘Nothing at all.’
</p>
<p>
Still the minister was not satisfied. ‘Will you go in and see?’ he
said. ‘I should be much more at ease.’
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Simpkins returned up the staircase, went to her daughter’s room, and
came out again almost instantly. ‘There is nothing at all the matter with
Lizzy,’ she said; and descended again to attend to the applicant, who,
having seen the light, had remained quiet during this interval.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale went into his room and lay down as before. He heard Lizzy’s
mother open the front door, admit the girl, and then the murmured discourse of
both as they went to the store-cupboard for the medicament required. The girl
departed, the door was fastened, Mrs. Simpkins came upstairs, and the house was
again in silence. Still the minister did not fall asleep. He could not get rid
of a singular suspicion, which was all the more harassing in being, if true,
the most unaccountable thing within his experience. That Lizzy Newberry was in
her bedroom when he made such a clamour at the door he could not possibly
convince himself; notwithstanding that he had heard her come upstairs at the
usual time, go into her chamber, and shut herself up in the usual way. Yet all
reason was so much against her being elsewhere, that he was constrained to go
back again to the unlikely theory of a heavy sleep, though he had heard neither
breath nor movement during a shouting and knocking loud enough to rouse the
Seven Sleepers.
</p>
<p>
Before coming to any positive conclusion he fell asleep himself, and did not
awake till day. He saw nothing of Mrs. Newberry in the morning, before he went
out to meet the rising sun, as he liked to do when the weather was fine; but as
this was by no means unusual, he took no notice of it. At breakfast-time he
knew that she was not far off by hearing her in the kitchen, and though he saw
nothing of her person, that back apartment being rigorously closed against his
eyes, she seemed to be talking, ordering, and bustling about among the pots and
skimmers in so ordinary a manner, that there was no reason for his wasting more
time in fruitless surmise.
</p>
<p>
The minister suffered from these distractions, and his extemporized sermons
were not improved thereby. Already he often said Romans for Corinthians in the
pulpit, and gave out hymns in strange cramped metres, that hitherto had always
been skipped, because the congregation could not raise a tune to fit them. He
fully resolved that as soon as his few weeks of stay approached their end he
would cut the matter short, and commit himself by proposing a definite
engagement, repenting at leisure if necessary.
</p>
<p>
With this end in view, he suggested to her on the evening after her mysterious
sleep that they should take a walk together just before dark, the latter part
of the proposition being introduced that they might return home unseen. She
consented to go; and away they went over a stile, to a shrouded footpath suited
for the occasion. But, in spite of attempts on both sides, they were unable to
infuse much spirit into the ramble. She looked rather paler than usual, and
sometimes turned her head away.
</p>
<p>
‘Lizzy,’ said Stockdale reproachfully, when they had walked in
silence a long distance.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said she.
</p>
<p>
‘You yawned—much my company is to you!’ He put it in that
way, but he was really wondering whether her yawn could possibly have more to
do with physical weariness from the night before than mental weariness of that
present moment. Lizzy apologized, and owned that she was rather tired, which
gave him an opening for a direct question on the point; but his modesty would
not allow him to put it to her; and he uncomfortably resolved to wait.
</p>
<p>
The month of February passed with alternations of mud and frost, rain and
sleet, east winds and north-westerly gales. The hollow places in the ploughed
fields showed themselves as pools of water, which had settled there from the
higher levels, and had not yet found time to soak away. The birds began to get
lively, and a single thrush came just before sunset each evening, and sang
hopefully on the large elm-tree which stood nearest to Mrs. Newberry’s
house. Cold blasts and brittle earth had given place to an oozing dampness more
unpleasant in itself than frost; but it suggested coming spring, and its
unpleasantness was of a bearable kind.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale had been going to bring about a practical understanding with Lizzy at
least half-a-dozen times; but, what with the mystery of her apparent absence on
the night of the neighbour’s call, and her curious way of lying in bed at
unaccountable times, he felt a check within him whenever he wanted to speak
out. Thus they still lived on as indefinitely affianced lovers, each of whom
hardly acknowledged the other’s claim to the name of chosen one.
Stockdale persuaded himself that his hesitation was owing to the postponement
of the ordained minister’s arrival, and the consequent delay in his own
departure, which did away with all necessity for haste in his courtship; but
perhaps it was only that his discretion was reasserting itself, and telling him
that he had better get clearer ideas of Lizzy before arranging for the grand
contract of his life with her. She, on her part, always seemed ready to be
urged further on that question than he had hitherto attempted to go; but she
was none the less independent, and to a degree which would have kept from
flagging the passion of a far more mutable man.
</p>
<p>
On the evening of the first of March he went casually into his bedroom about
dusk, and noticed lying on a chair a greatcoat, hat, and breeches. Having no
recollection of leaving any clothes of his own in that spot, he went and
examined them as well as he could in the twilight, and found that they did not
belong to him. He paused for a moment to consider how they might have got
there. He was the only man living in the house; and yet these were not his
garments, unless he had made a mistake. No, they were not his. He called up
Martha Sarah.
</p>
<p>
‘How did these things come in my room?’ he said, flinging the
objectionable articles to the floor.
</p>
<p>
Martha said that Mrs. Newberry had given them to her to brush, and that she had
brought them up there thinking they must be Mr. Stockdale’s, as there was
no other gentleman a-lodging there.
</p>
<p>
‘Of course you did,’ said Stockdale. ‘Now take them down to
your mis’ess, and say they are some clothes I have found here and know
nothing about.’
</p>
<p>
As the door was left open he heard the conversation downstairs. ‘How
stupid!’ said Mrs. Newberry, in a tone of confusion. ‘Why, Marther
Sarer, I did not tell you to take ’em to Mr. Stockdale’s
room?’
</p>
<p>
‘I thought they must be his as they was so muddy,’ said Martha
humbly.
</p>
<p>
‘You should have left ’em on the clothes-horse,’ said the
young mistress severely; and she came upstairs with the garments on her arm,
quickly passed Stockdale’s room, and threw them forcibly into a closet at
the end of a passage. With this the incident ended, and the house was silent
again.
</p>
<p>
There would have been nothing remarkable in finding such clothes in a
widow’s house had they been clean; or moth-eaten, or creased, or mouldy
from long lying by; but that they should be splashed with recent mud bothered
Stockdale a good deal. When a young pastor is in the aspen stage of attachment,
and open to agitation at the merest trifles, a really substantial incongruity
of this complexion is a disturbing thing. However, nothing further occurred at
that time; but he became watchful, and given to conjecture, and was unable to
forget the circumstance.
</p>
<p>
One morning, on looking from his window, he saw Mrs. Newberry herself brushing
the tails of a long drab greatcoat, which, if he mistook not, was the very same
garment as the one that had adorned the chair of his room. It was densely
splashed up to the hollow of the back with neighbouring Nether-Moynton mud, to
judge by its colour, the spots being distinctly visible to him in the sunlight.
The previous day or two having been wet, the inference was irresistible that
the wearer had quite recently been walking some considerable distance about the
lanes and fields. Stockdale opened the window and looked out, and Mrs. Newberry
turned her head. Her face became slowly red; she never had looked prettier, or
more incomprehensible, he waved his hand affectionately, and said good-morning;
she answered with embarrassment, having ceased her occupation on the instant
that she saw him, and rolled up the coat half-cleaned.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale shut the window. Some simple explanation of her proceeding was
doubtless within the bounds of possibility; but he himself could not think of
one; and he wished that she had placed the matter beyond conjecture by
voluntarily saying something about it there and then.
</p>
<p>
But, though Lizzy had not offered an explanation at the moment, the subject was
brought forward by her at the next time of their meeting. She was chatting to
him concerning some other event, and remarked that it happened about the time
when she was dusting some old clothes that had belonged to her poor husband.
</p>
<p>
‘You keep them clean out of respect to his memory?’ said Stockdale
tentatively.
</p>
<p>
‘I air and dust them sometimes,’ she said, with the most charming
innocence in the world.
</p>
<p>
‘Do dead men come out of their graves and walk in mud?’ murmured
the minister, in a cold sweat at the deception that she was practising.
</p>
<p>
‘What did you say?’ asked Lizzy.
</p>
<p>
‘Nothing, nothing,’ said he mournfully. ‘Mere words—a
phrase that will do for my sermon next Sunday.’ It was too plain that
Lizzy was unaware that he had seen actual pedestrian splashes upon the skirts
of the tell-tale overcoat, and that she imagined him to believe it had come
direct from some chest or drawer.
</p>
<p>
The aspect of the case was now considerably darker. Stockdale was so much
depressed by it that he did not challenge her explanation, or threaten to go
off as a missionary to benighted islanders, or reproach her in any way
whatever. He simply parted from her when she had done talking, and lived on in
perplexity, till by degrees his natural manner became sad and constrained.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV—AT THE TIME OF THE NEW MOON</h3>
<p>
The following Thursday was changeable, damp, and gloomy; and the night
threatened to be windy and unpleasant. Stockdale had gone away to Knollsea in
the morning, to be present at some commemoration service there, and on his
return he was met by the attractive Lizzy in the passage. Whether influenced by
the tide of cheerfulness which had attended him that day, or by the drive
through the open air, or whether from a natural disposition to let bygones
alone, he allowed himself to be fascinated into forgetfulness of the greatcoat
incident, and upon the whole passed a pleasant evening; not so much in her
society as within sound of her voice, as she sat talking in the back parlour to
her mother, till the latter went to bed. Shortly after this Mrs. Newberry
retired, and then Stockdale prepared to go upstairs himself. But before he left
the room he remained standing by the dying embers awhile, thinking long of one
thing and another; and was only aroused by the flickering of his candle in the
socket as it suddenly declined and went out. Knowing that there were a
tinder-box, matches, and another candle in his bedroom, he felt his way
upstairs without a light. On reaching his chamber he laid his hand on every
possible ledge and corner for the tinderbox, but for a long time in vain.
Discovering it at length, Stockdale produced a spark, and was kindling the
brimstone, when he fancied that he heard a movement in the passage. He blew
harder at the lint, the match flared up, and looking by aid of the blue light
through the door, which had been standing open all this time, he was surprised
to see a male figure vanishing round the top of the staircase with the evident
intention of escaping unobserved. The personage wore the clothes which Lizzy
had been brushing, and something in the outline and gait suggested to the
minister that the wearer was Lizzy herself.
</p>
<p>
But he was not sure of this; and, greatly excited, Stockdale determined to
investigate the mystery, and to adopt his own way for doing it. He blew out the
match without lighting the candle, went into the passage, and proceeded on
tiptoe towards Lizzy’s room. A faint grey square of light in the
direction of the chamber-window as he approached told him that the door was
open, and at once suggested that the occupant was gone. He turned and brought
down his fist upon the handrail of the staircase: ‘It was she; in her
late husband’s coat and hat!’
</p>
<p>
Somewhat relieved to find that there was no intruder in the case, yet none the
less surprised, the minister crept down the stairs, softly put on his boots,
overcoat, and hat, and tried the front door. It was fastened as usual: he went
to the back door, found this unlocked, and emerged into the garden. The night
was mild and moonless, and rain had lately been falling, though for the present
it had ceased. There was a sudden dropping from the trees and bushes every now
and then, as each passing wind shook their boughs. Among these sounds Stockdale
heard the faint fall of feet upon the road outside, and he guessed from the
step that it was Lizzy’s. He followed the sound, and, helped by the
circumstance of the wind blowing from the direction in which the pedestrian
moved, he got nearly close to her, and kept there, without risk of being
overheard. While he thus followed her up the street or lane, as it might
indifferently be called, there being more hedge than houses on either side, a
figure came forward to her from one of the cottage doors. Lizzy stopped; the
minister stepped upon the grass and stopped also.
</p>
<p>
‘Is that Mrs. Newberry?’ said the man who had come out, whose voice
Stockdale recognized as that of one of the most devout members of his
congregation.
</p>
<p>
‘It is,’ said Lizzy.
</p>
<p>
‘I be quite ready—I’ve been here this quarter-hour.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah, John,’ said she, ‘I have bad news; there is danger
to-night for our venture.’
</p>
<p>
‘And d’ye tell o’t! I dreamed there might be.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ she said hurriedly; ‘and you must go at once round to
where the chaps are waiting, and tell them they will not be wanted till
to-morrow night at the same time. I go to burn the lugger off.’
</p>
<p>
‘I will,’ he said; and instantly went off through a gate, Lizzy
continuing her way.
</p>
<p>
On she tripped at a quickening pace till the lane turned into the
turnpike-road, which she crossed, and got into the track for Ringsworth. Here
she ascended the hill without the least hesitation, passed the lonely hamlet of
Holworth, and went down the vale on the other side. Stockdale had never taken
any extensive walks in this direction, but he was aware that if she persisted
in her course much longer she would draw near to the coast, which was here
between two and three miles distant from Nether-Moynton; and as it had been
about a quarter-past eleven o’clock when they set out, her intention
seemed to be to reach the shore about midnight.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy soon ascended a small mound, which Stockdale at the same time adroitly
skirted on the left; and a dull monotonous roar burst upon his ear. The hillock
was about fifty yards from the top of the cliffs, and by day it apparently
commanded a full view of the bay. There was light enough in the sky to show her
disguised figure against it when she reached the top, where she paused, and
afterwards sat down. Stockdale, not wishing on any account to alarm her at this
moment, yet desirous of being near her, sank upon his hands and knees, crept a
little higher up, and there stayed still.
</p>
<p>
The wind was chilly, the ground damp, and his position one in which he did not
care to remain long. However, before he had decided to leave it, the young man
heard voices behind him. What they signified he did not know; but, fearing that
Lizzy was in danger, he was about to run forward and warn her that she might be
seen, when she crept to the shelter of a little bush which maintained a
precarious existence in that exposed spot; and her form was absorbed in its
dark and stunted outline as if she had become part of it. She had evidently
heard the men as well as he. They passed near him, talking in loud and careless
tones, which could be heard above the uninterrupted washings of the sea, and
which suggested that they were not engaged in any business at their own risk.
This proved to be the fact: some of their words floated across to him, and
caused him to forget at once the coldness of his situation.
</p>
<p>
‘What’s the vessel?’
</p>
<p>
‘A lugger, about fifty tons.’
</p>
<p>
‘From Cherbourg, I suppose?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, ’a b’lieve.’
</p>
<p>
‘But it don’t all belong to Owlett?’
</p>
<p>
‘O no. He’s only got a share. There’s another or two in
it—a farmer and such like, but the names I don’t know.’
</p>
<p>
The voices died away, and the heads and shoulders of the men diminished towards
the cliff, and dropped out of sight.
</p>
<p>
‘My darling has been tempted to buy a share by that unbeliever
Owlett,’ groaned the minister, his honest affection for Lizzy having
quickened to its intensest point during these moments of risk to her person and
name. ‘That’s why she’s here,’ he said to himself.
‘O, it will be the ruin of her!’
</p>
<p>
His perturbation was interrupted by the sudden bursting out of a bright and
increasing light from the spot where Lizzy was in hiding. A few seconds later,
and before it had reached the height of a blaze, he heard her rush past him
down the hollow like a stone from a sling, in the direction of home. The light
now flared high and wide, and showed its position clearly. She had kindled a
bough of furze and stuck it into the bush under which she had been crouching;
the wind fanned the flame, which crackled fiercely, and threatened to consume
the bush as well as the bough. Stockdale paused just long enough to notice thus
much, and then followed rapidly the route taken by the young woman. His
intention was to overtake her, and reveal himself as a friend; but run as he
would he could see nothing of her. Thus he flew across the open country about
Holworth, twisting his legs and ankles in unexpected fissures and descents,
till, on coming to the gate between the downs and the road, he was forced to
pause to get breath. There was no audible movement either in front or behind
him, and he now concluded that she had not outrun him, but that, hearing him at
her heels, and believing him one of the excise party, she had hidden herself
somewhere on the way, and let him pass by.
</p>
<p>
He went on at a more leisurely pace towards the village. On reaching the house
he found his surmise to be correct, for the gate was on the latch, and the door
unfastened, just as he had left them. Stockdale closed the door behind him, and
waited silently in the passage. In about ten minutes he heard the same light
footstep that he had heard in going out; it paused at the gate, which opened
and shut softly, and then the door-latch was lifted, and Lizzy came in.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale went forward and said at once, ‘Lizzy, don’t be
frightened. I have been waiting up for you.’
</p>
<p>
She started, though she had recognized the voice. ‘It is Mr. Stockdale,
isn’t it?’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ he answered, becoming angry now that she was safe indoors,
and not alarmed. ‘And a nice game I’ve found you out in to-night.
You are in man’s clothes, and I am ashamed of you!’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy could hardly find a voice to answer this unexpected reproach.
</p>
<p>
‘I am only partly in man’s clothes,’ she faltered, shrinking
back to the wall. ‘It is only his greatcoat and hat and breeches that
I’ve got on, which is no harm, as he was my own husband; and I do it only
because a cloak blows about so, and you can’t use your arms. I have got
my own dress under just the same—it is only tucked in! Will you go away
upstairs and let me pass? I didn’t want you to see me at such a time as
this!’
</p>
<p>
‘But I have a right to see you! How do you think there can be anything
between us now?’ Lizzy was silent. ‘You are a smuggler,’ he
continued sadly.
</p>
<p>
‘I have only a share in the run,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘That makes no difference. Whatever did you engage in such a trade as
that for, and keep it such a secret from me all this time?’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t do it always. I only do it in winter-time when ’tis
new moon.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I suppose that’s because it can’t be done anywhen else
. . . You have regularly upset me, Lizzy.’
</p>
<p>
‘I am sorry for that,’ Lizzy meekly replied.
</p>
<p>
‘Well now,’ said he more tenderly, ‘no harm is done as yet.
Won’t you for the sake of me give up this blamable and dangerous practice
altogether?’
</p>
<p>
‘I must do my best to save this run,’ said she, getting rather
husky in the throat. ‘I don’t want to give you up—you know
that; but I don’t want to lose my venture. I don’t know what to do
now! Why I have kept it so secret from you is that I was afraid you would be
angry if you knew.’
</p>
<p>
‘I should think so! I suppose if I had married you without finding this
out you’d have gone on with it just the same?’
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t know. I did not think so far ahead. I only went to-night
to burn the folks off, because we found that the excisemen knew where the tubs
were to be landed.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is a pretty mess to be in altogether, is this,’ said the
distracted young minister. ‘Well, what will you do now?’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy slowly murmured the particulars of their plan, the chief of which were
that they meant to try their luck at some other point of the shore the next
night; that three landing-places were always agreed upon before the run was
attempted, with the understanding that, if the vessel was ‘burnt
off’ from the first point, which was Ringsworth, as it had been by her
to-night, the crew should attempt to make the second, which was Lulstead Cove,
on the second night; and if there, too, danger threatened, they should on the
third night try the third place, which was behind a headland further west.
</p>
<p>
‘Suppose the officers hinder them landing there too?’ he said, his
attention to this interesting programme displacing for a moment his concern at
her share in it.
</p>
<p>
‘Then we shan’t try anywhere else all this dark—that’s
what we call the time between moon and moon—and perhaps they’ll
string the tubs to a stray-line, and sink ’em a little-ways from shore,
and take the bearings; and then when they have a chance they’ll go to
creep for ’em.’
</p>
<p>
‘What’s that?’
</p>
<p>
‘O, they’ll go out in a boat and drag a creeper—that’s
a grapnel—along the bottom till it catch hold of the stray-line.’
</p>
<p>
The minister stood thinking; and there was no sound within doors but the tick
of the clock on the stairs, and the quick breathing of Lizzy, partly from her
walk and partly from agitation, as she stood close to the wall, not in such
complete darkness but that he could discern against its whitewashed surface the
greatcoat and broad hat which covered her.
</p>
<p>
‘Lizzy, all this is very wrong,’ he said. ‘Don’t you
remember the lesson of the tribute-money? “Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar’s.” Surely you have heard that read times enough in
your growing up?’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s dead,’ she pouted.
</p>
<p>
‘But the spirit of the text is in force just the same.’
</p>
<p>
‘My father did it, and so did my grandfather, and almost everybody in
Nether-Moynton lives by it, and life would be so dull if it wasn’t for
that, that I should not care to live at all.’
</p>
<p>
‘I am nothing to live for, of course,’ he replied bitterly.
‘You would not think it worth while to give up this wild business and
live for me alone?’
</p>
<p>
‘I have never looked at it like that.’
</p>
<p>
‘And you won’t promise and wait till I am ready?’
</p>
<p>
‘I cannot give you my word to-night.’ And, looking thoughtfully
down, she gradually moved and moved away, going into the adjoining room, and
closing the door between them. She remained there in the dark till he was tired
of waiting, and had gone up to his own chamber.
</p>
<p>
Poor Stockdale was dreadfully depressed all the next day by the discoveries of
the night before. Lizzy was unmistakably a fascinating young woman, but as a
minister’s wife she was hardly to be contemplated. ‘If I had only
stuck to father’s little grocery business, instead of going in for the
ministry, she would have suited me beautifully!’ he said sadly, until he
remembered that in that case he would never have come from his distant home to
Nether-Moynton, and never have known her.
</p>
<p>
The estrangement between them was not complete, but it was sufficient to keep
them out of each other’s company. Once during the day he met her in the
garden-path, and said, turning a reproachful eye upon her, ‘Do you
promise, Lizzy?’ But she did not reply. The evening drew on, and he knew
well enough that Lizzy would repeat her excursion at night—her
half-offended manner had shown that she had not the slightest intention of
altering her plans at present. He did not wish to repeat his own share of the
adventure; but, act as he would, his uneasiness on her account increased with
the decline of day. Supposing that an accident should befall her, he would
never forgive himself for not being there to help, much as he disliked the idea
of seeming to countenance such unlawful escapades.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER V—HOW THEY WENT TO LULSTEAD COVE</h3>
<p>
As he had expected, she left the house at the same hour at night, this time
passing his door without stealth, as if she knew very well that he would be
watching, and were resolved to brave his displeasure. He was quite ready,
opened the door quickly, and reached the back door almost as soon as she.
</p>
<p>
‘Then you will go, Lizzy?’ he said as he stood on the step beside
her, who now again appeared as a little man with a face altogether unsuited to
his clothes.
</p>
<p>
‘I must,’ she said, repressed by his stern manner.
</p>
<p>
‘Then I shall go too,’ said he.
</p>
<p>
‘And I am sure you will enjoy it!’ she exclaimed in more buoyant
tones. ‘Everybody does who tries it.’
</p>
<p>
‘God forbid that I should!’ he said. ‘But I must look after
you.’
</p>
<p>
They opened the wicket and went up the road abreast of each other, but at some
distance apart, scarcely a word passing between them. The evening was rather
less favourable to smuggling enterprise than the last had been, the wind being
lower, and the sky somewhat clear towards the north.
</p>
<p>
‘It is rather lighter,’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘’Tis, unfortunately,’ said she. ‘But it is only from
those few stars over there. The moon was new to-day at four o’clock, and
I expected clouds. I hope we shall be able to do it this dark, for when we have
to sink ’em for long it makes the stuff taste bleachy, and folks
don’t like it so well.’
</p>
<p>
Her course was different from that of the preceding night, branching off to the
left over Lord’s Barrow as soon as they had got out of the lane and
crossed the highway. By the time they reached Chaldon Down, Stockdale, who had
been in perplexed thought as to what he should say to her, decided that he
would not attempt expostulation now, while she was excited by the adventure,
but wait till it was over, and endeavour to keep her from such practices in
future. It occurred to him once or twice, as they rambled on, that should they
be surprised by the excisemen, his situation would be more awkward than hers,
for it would be difficult to prove his true motive in coming to the spot; but
the risk was a slight consideration beside his wish to be with her.
</p>
<p>
They now arrived at a ravine which lay on the outskirts of Chaldon, a village
two miles on their way towards the point of the shore they sought. Lizzy broke
the silence this time: ‘I have to wait here to meet the carriers. I
don’t know if they have come yet. As I told you, we go to Lulstead Cove
to-night, and it is two miles further than Ringsworth.’
</p>
<p>
It turned out that the men had already come; for while she spoke two or three
dozen heads broke the line of the slope, and a company of them at once
descended from the bushes where they had been lying in wait. These carriers
were men whom Lizzy and other proprietors regularly employed to bring the tubs
from the boat to a hiding-place inland. They were all young fellows of
Nether-Moynton, Chaldon, and the neighbourhood, quiet and inoffensive persons,
who simply engaged to carry the cargo for Lizzy and her cousin Owlett, as they
would have engaged in any other labour for which they were fairly well paid.
</p>
<p>
At a word from her they closed in together. ‘You had better take it
now,’ she said to them; and handed to each a packet. It contained six
shillings, their remuneration for the night’s undertaking, which was paid
beforehand without reference to success or failure; but, besides this, they had
the privilege of selling as agents when the run was successfully made. As soon
as it was done, she said to them, ‘The place is the old one near Lulstead
Cove;’ the men till that moment not having been told whither they were
bound, for obvious reasons. ‘Owlett will meet you there,’ added
Lizzy. ‘I shall follow behind, to see that we are not watched.’
</p>
<p>
The carriers went on, and Stockdale and Mrs. Newberry followed at a distance of
a stone’s throw. ‘What do these men do by day?’ he said.
</p>
<p>
‘Twelve or fourteen of them are labouring men. Some are brickmakers, some
carpenters, some shoe-makers, some thatchers. They are all known to me very
well. Nine of ’em are of your own congregation.’
</p>
<p>
‘I can’t help that,’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘O, I know you can’t. I only told you. The others are more
church-inclined, because they supply the pa’son with all the spirits he
requires, and they don’t wish to show unfriendliness to a
customer.’
</p>
<p>
‘How do you choose ’em?’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘We choose ’em for their closeness, and because they are strong and
surefooted, and able to carry a heavy load a long way without being
tired.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale sighed as she enumerated each particular, for it proved how far
involved in the business a woman must be who was so well acquainted with its
conditions and needs. And yet he felt more tenderly towards her at this moment
than he had felt all the foregoing day. Perhaps it was that her experienced
manner and hold indifference stirred his admiration in spite of himself.
</p>
<p>
‘Take my arm, Lizzy,’ he murmured.
</p>
<p>
‘I don’t want it,’ she said. ‘Besides, we may never be
to each other again what we once have been.’
</p>
<p>
‘That depends upon you,’ said he, and they went on again as before.
</p>
<p>
The hired carriers paced along over Chaldon Down with as little hesitation as
if it had been day, avoiding the cart-way, and leaving the village of East
Chaldon on the left, so as to reach the crest of the hill at a lonely trackless
place not far from the ancient earthwork called Round Pound. An hour’s
brisk walking brought them within sound of the sea, not many hundred yards from
Lulstead Cove. Here they paused, and Lizzy and Stockdale came up with them,
when they went on together to the verge of the cliff. One of the men now
produced an iron bar, which he drove firmly into the soil a yard from the edge,
and attached to it a rope that he had uncoiled from his body. They all began to
descend, partly stepping, partly sliding down the incline, as the rope slipped
through their hands.
</p>
<p>
‘You will not go to the bottom, Lizzy?’ said Stockdale anxiously.
</p>
<p>
‘No. I stay here to watch,’ she said. ‘Owlett is down
there.’
</p>
<p>
The men remained quite silent when they reached the shore; and the next thing
audible to the two at the top was the dip of heavy oars, and the dashing of
waves against a boat’s bow. In a moment the keel gently touched the
shingle, and Stockdale heard the footsteps of the thirty-six carriers running
forwards over the pebbles towards the point of landing.
</p>
<p>
There was a sousing in the water as of a brood of ducks plunging in, showing
that the men had not been particular about keeping their legs, or even their
waists, dry from the brine: but it was impossible to see what they were doing,
and in a few minutes the shingle was trampled again. The iron bar sustaining
the rope, on which Stockdale’s hand rested, began to swerve a little, and
the carriers one by one appeared climbing up the sloping cliff; dripping
audibly as they came, and sustaining themselves by the guide-rope. Each man on
reaching the top was seen to be carrying a pair of tubs, one on his back and
one on his chest, the two being slung together by cords passing round the chine
hoops, and resting on the carrier’s shoulders. Some of the stronger men
carried three by putting an extra one on the top behind, but the customary load
was a pair, these being quite weighty enough to give their bearer the sensation
of having chest and backbone in contact after a walk of four or five miles.
</p>
<p>
‘Where is Owlett?’ said Lizzy to one of them.
</p>
<p>
‘He will not come up this way,’ said the carrier. ‘He’s
to bide on shore till we be safe off.’ Then, without waiting for the
rest, the foremost men plunged across the down; and, when the last had
ascended, Lizzy pulled up the rope, wound it round her arm, wriggled the bar
from the sod, and turned to follow the carriers.
</p>
<p>
‘You are very anxious about Owlett’s safety,’ said the
minister.
</p>
<p>
‘Was there ever such a man!’ said Lizzy. ‘Why, isn’t he
my cousin?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes. Well, it is a bad night’s work,’ said Stockdale
heavily. ‘But I’ll carry the bar and rope for you.’
</p>
<p>
‘Thank God, the tubs have got so far all right,’ said she.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale shook his head, and, taking the bar, walked by her side towards the
downs; and the moan of the sea was heard no more.
</p>
<p>
‘Is this what you meant the other day when you spoke of having business
with Owlett?’ the young man asked.
</p>
<p>
‘This is it,’ she replied. ‘I never see him on any other
matter.’
</p>
<p>
‘A partnership of that kind with a young man is very odd.’
</p>
<p>
‘It was begun by my father and his, who were brother-laws.’
</p>
<p>
Her companion could not blind himself to the fact that where tastes and
pursuits were so akin as Lizzy’s and Owlett’s, and where risks were
shared, as with them, in every undertaking, there would be a peculiar
appropriateness in her answering Owlett’s standing question on matrimony
in the affirmative. This did not soothe Stockdale, its tendency being rather to
stimulate in him an effort to make the pair as inappropriate as possible, and
win her away from this nocturnal crew to correctness of conduct and a
minister’s parlour in some far-removed inland county.
</p>
<p>
They had been walking near enough to the file of carriers for Stockdale to
perceive that, when they got into the road to the village, they split up into
two companies of unequal size, each of which made off in a direction of its
own. One company, the smaller of the two, went towards the church, and by the
time that Lizzy and Stockdale reached their own house these men had scaled the
churchyard wall, and were proceeding noiselessly over the grass within.
</p>
<p>
‘I see that Owlett has arranged for one batch to be put in the church
again,’ observed Lizzy. ‘Do you remember my taking you there the
first night you came?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, of course,’ said Stockdale. ‘No wonder you had
permission to broach the tubs—they were his, I suppose?’
</p>
<p>
‘No, they were not—they were mine; I had permission from myself.
The day after that they went several miles inland in a waggon-load of manure,
and sold very well.’
</p>
<p>
At this moment the group of men who had made off to the left some time before
began leaping one by one from the hedge opposite Lizzy’s house, and the
first man, who had no tubs upon his shoulders, came forward.
</p>
<p>
‘Mrs. Newberry, isn’t it?’ he said hastily.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, Jim,’ said she. ‘What’s the matter?’
</p>
<p>
‘I find that we can’t put any in Badger’s Clump to-night,
Lizzy,’ said Owlett. ‘The place is watched. We must sling the
apple-tree in the orchet if there’s time. We can’t put any more
under the church lumber than I have sent on there, and my mixen hev already
more in en than is safe.’
</p>
<p>
‘Very well,’ she said. ‘Be quick about it—that’s
all. What can I do?’
</p>
<p>
‘Nothing at all, please. Ah, it is the minister!—you two that
can’t do anything had better get indoors and not be zeed.’
</p>
<p>
While Owlett thus conversed, in a tone so full of contraband anxiety and so
free from lover’s jealousy, the men who followed him had been descending
one by one from the hedge; and it unfortunately happened that when the hindmost
took his leap, the cord slipped which sustained his tubs: the result was that
both the kegs fell into the road, one of them being stove in by the blow.
</p>
<p>
‘’Od drown it all!’ said Owlett, rushing back.
</p>
<p>
‘It is worth a good deal, I suppose?’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘O no—about two guineas and half to us now,’ said Lizzy
excitedly. ‘It isn’t that—it is the smell! It is so blazing
strong before it has been lowered by water, that it smells dreadfully when
spilt in the road like that! I do hope Latimer won’t pass by till it is
gone off.’
</p>
<p>
Owlett and one or two others picked up the burst tub and began to scrape and
trample over the spot, to disperse the liquor as much as possible; and then
they all entered the gate of Owlett’s orchard, which adjoined
Lizzy’s garden on the right. Stockdale did not care to follow them, for
several on recognizing him had looked wonderingly at his presence, though they
said nothing. Lizzy left his side and went to the bottom of the garden, looking
over the hedge into the orchard, where the men could be dimly seen bustling
about, and apparently hiding the tubs. All was done noiselessly, and without a
light; and when it was over they dispersed in different directions, those who
had taken their cargoes to the church having already gone off to their homes.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy returned to the garden-gate, over which Stockdale was still abstractedly
leaning. ‘It is all finished: I am going indoors now,’ she said
gently. ‘I will leave the door ajar for you.’
</p>
<p>
‘O no—you needn’t,’ said Stockdale; ‘I am coming
too.’
</p>
<p>
But before either of them had moved, the faint clatter of horses’ hoofs
broke upon the ear, and it seemed to come from the point where the track across
the down joined the hard road.
</p>
<p>
‘They are just too late!’ cried Lizzy exultingly.
</p>
<p>
‘Who?’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘Latimer, the riding-officer, and some assistant of his. We had better go
indoors.’
</p>
<p>
They entered the house, and Lizzy bolted the door. ‘Please don’t
get a light, Mr. Stockdale,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘Of course I will not,’ said he.
</p>
<p>
‘I thought you might be on the side of the king,’ said Lizzy, with
faintest sarcasm.
</p>
<p>
‘I am,’ said Stockdale. ‘But, Lizzy Newberry, I love you, and
you know it perfectly well; and you ought to know, if you do not, what I have
suffered in my conscience on your account these last few days!’
</p>
<p>
‘I guess very well,’ she said hurriedly. ‘Yet I don’t
see why. Ah, you are better than I!’
</p>
<p>
The trotting of the horses seemed to have again died away, and the pair of
listeners touched each other’s fingers in the cold
‘Good-night’ of those whom something seriously divided. They were
on the landing, but before they had taken three steps apart, the tramp of the
horsemen suddenly revived, almost close to the house. Lizzy turned to the
staircase window, opened the casement about an inch, and put her face close to
the aperture. ‘Yes, one of ’em is Latimer,’ she whispered.
‘He always rides a white horse. One would think it was the last colour
for a man in that line.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale looked, and saw the white shape of the animal as it passed by; but
before the riders had gone another ten yards, Latimer reined in his horse, and
said something to his companion which neither Stockdale nor Lizzy could hear.
Its drift was, however, soon made evident, for the other man stopped also; and
sharply turning the horses’ heads they cautiously retraced their steps.
When they were again opposite Mrs. Newberry’s garden, Latimer dismounted,
and the man on the dark horse did the same.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy and Stockdale, intently listening and observing the proceedings,
naturally put their heads as close as possible to the slit formed by the
slightly opened casement; and thus it occurred that at last their cheeks came
positively into contact. They went on listening, as if they did not know of the
singular incident which had happened to their faces, and the pressure of each
to each rather increased than lessened with the lapse of time.
</p>
<p>
They could hear the excisemen sniffing the air like hounds as they paced slowly
along. When they reached the spot where the tub had burst, both stopped on the
instant.
</p>
<p>
‘Ay, ay, ’tis quite strong here,’ said the second officer.
‘Shall we knock at the door?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, no,’ said Latimer. ‘Maybe this is only a trick to put
us off the scent. They wouldn’t kick up this stink anywhere near their
hiding-place. I have known such things before.’
</p>
<p>
‘Anyhow, the things, or some of ’em, must have been brought this
way,’ said the other.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said Latimer musingly. ‘Unless ’tis all done to
tole us the wrong way. I have a mind that we go home for to-night without
saying a word, and come the first thing in the morning with more hands. I know
they have storages about here, but we can do nothing by this owl’s light.
We will look round the parish and see if everybody is in bed, John; and if all
is quiet, we will do as I say.’
</p>
<p>
They went on, and the two inside the window could hear them passing leisurely
through the whole village, the street of which curved round at the bottom and
entered the turnpike road at another junction. This way the excisemen followed,
and the amble of their horses died quite away.
</p>
<p>
‘What will you do?’ said Stockdale, withdrawing from his position.
</p>
<p>
She knew that he alluded to the coming search by the officers, to divert her
attention from their own tender incident by the casement, which he wished to be
passed over as a thing rather dreamt of than done. ‘O, nothing,’
she replied, with as much coolness as she could command under her
disappointment at his manner. ‘We often have such storms as this. You
would not be frightened if you knew what fools they are. Fancy riding o’
horseback through the place: of course they will hear and see nobody while they
make that noise; but they are always afraid to get off, in case some of our
fellows should burst out upon ’em, and tie them up to the gate-post, as
they have done before now. Good-night, Mr. Stockdale.’
</p>
<p>
She closed the window and went to her room, where a tear fell from her eyes;
and that not because of the alertness of the riding-officers.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VI—THE GREAT SEARCH AT NETHER-MOYNTON</h3>
<p>
Stockdale was so excited by the events of the evening, and the dilemma that he
was placed in between conscience and love, that he did not sleep, or even doze,
but remained as broadly awake as at noonday. As soon as the grey light began to
touch ever so faintly the whiter objects in his bedroom he arose, dressed
himself, and went downstairs into the road.
</p>
<p>
The village was already astir. Several of the carriers had heard the well-known
tramp of Latimer’s horse while they were undressing in the dark that
night, and had already communicated with each other and Owlett on the subject.
The only doubt seemed to be about the safety of those tubs which had been left
under the church gallery-stairs, and after a short discussion at the corner of
the mill, it was agreed that these should be removed before it got lighter, and
hidden in the middle of a double hedge bordering the adjoining field. However,
before anything could be carried into effect, the footsteps of many men were
heard coming down the lane from the highway.
</p>
<p>
‘Damn it, here they be,’ said Owlett, who, having already drawn the
hatch and started his mill for the day, stood stolidly at the mill-door covered
with flour, as if the interest of his whole soul was bound up in the shaking
walls around him.
</p>
<p>
The two or three with whom he had been talking dispersed to their usual work,
and when the excise officers, and the formidable body of men they had hired,
reached the village cross, between the mill and Mrs. Newberry’s house,
the village wore the natural aspect of a place beginning its morning labours.
</p>
<p>
‘Now,’ said Latimer to his associates, who numbered thirteen men in
all, ‘what I know is that the things are somewhere in this here place. We
have got the day before us, and ’tis hard if we can’t light upon
’em and get ’em to Budmouth Custom-house before night. First we
will try the fuel-houses, and then we’ll work our way into the chimmers,
and then to the ricks and stables, and so creep round. You have nothing but
your noses to guide ye, mind, so use ’em to-day if you never did in your
lives before.’
</p>
<p>
Then the search began. Owlett, during the early part, watched from his
mill-window, Lizzy from the door of her house, with the greatest
self-possession. A farmer down below, who also had a share in the run, rode
about with one eye on his fields and the other on Latimer and his myrmidons,
prepared to put them off the scent if he should be asked a question. Stockdale,
who was no smuggler at all, felt more anxiety than the worst of them, and went
about his studies with a heavy heart, coming frequently to the door to ask
Lizzy some question or other on the consequences to her of the tubs being
found.
</p>
<p>
‘The consequences,’ she said quietly, ‘are simply that I
shall lose ’em. As I have none in the house or garden, they can’t
touch me personally.’
</p>
<p>
‘But you have some in the orchard?’
</p>
<p>
‘Owlett rents that of me, and he lends it to others. So it will be hard
to say who put any tubs there if they should be found.’
</p>
<p>
There was never such a tremendous sniffing known as that which took place in
Nether-Moynton parish and its vicinity this day. All was done methodically, and
mostly on hands and knees. At different hours of the day they had different
plans. From daybreak to breakfast-time the officers used their sense of smell
in a direct and straightforward manner only, pausing nowhere but at such places
as the tubs might be supposed to be secreted in at that very moment, pending
their removal on the following night. Among the places tested and examined were
</p>
<table style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto">
<tbody><tr>
<td>Hollow trees</td><td>Cupboards</td><td>Culverts</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Potato-graves</td><td>Clock-cases</td><td>Hedgerows</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Fuel-houses</td><td>Chimney-flues</td><td>Faggot-ricks</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Bedrooms</td><td>Rainwater-butts</td><td>Haystacks</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Apple-lofts</td><td>Pigsties</td><td>Coppers and ovens.</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<p>
After breakfast they recommenced with renewed vigour, taking a new line; that
is to say, directing their attention to clothes that might be supposed to have
come in contact with the tubs in their removal from the shore, such garments
being usually tainted with the spirit, owing to its oozing between the staves.
They now sniffed at—
</p>
<table style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto">
<tbody><tr>
<td>Smock-frocks</td><td>Smiths’ and shoemakers’ aprons</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Old shirts and waistcoats</td><td>Knee-naps and hedging-gloves</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Coats and hats</td><td>Tarpaulins</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Breeches and leggings</td><td>Market-cloaks</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Women’s shawls and gowns</td><td>Scarecrows</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<p>
And as soon as the mid-day meal was over, they pushed their search into places
where the spirits might have been thrown away in alarm:-
</p>
<table style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto">
<tbody><tr>
<td>Horse-ponds</td><td>Mixens</td><td>Sinks in yards</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Stable-drains</td><td>Wet ditches</td><td>Road-scrapings, and</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Cinder-heaps</td><td>Cesspools</td><td>Back-door gutters.</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<p>
But still these indefatigable excisemen discovered nothing more than the
original tell-tale smell in the road opposite Lizzy’s house, which even
yet had not passed off.
</p>
<p>
‘I’ll tell ye what it is, men,’ said Latimer, about three
o’clock in the afternoon, ‘we must begin over again. Find them tubs
I will.’
</p>
<p>
The men, who had been hired for the day, looked at their hands and knees, muddy
with creeping on all fours so frequently, and rubbed their noses, as if they
had almost had enough of it; for the quantity of bad air which had passed into
each one’s nostril had rendered it nearly as insensible as a flue.
However, after a moment’s hesitation, they prepared to start anew, except
three, whose power of smell had quite succumbed under the excessive wear and
tear of the day.
</p>
<p>
By this time not a male villager was to be seen in the parish. Owlett was not
at his mill, the farmers were not in their fields, the parson was not in his
garden, the smith had left his forge, and the wheelwright’s shop was
silent.
</p>
<p>
‘Where the divil are the folk gone?’ said Latimer, waking up to the
fact of their absence, and looking round. ‘I’ll have ’em up
for this! Why don’t they come and help us? There’s not a man about
the place but the Methodist parson, and he’s an old woman. I demand
assistance in the king’s name!’
</p>
<p>
‘We must find the jineral public afore we can demand that,’ said
his lieutenant.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, well, we shall do better without ’em,’ said Latimer,
who changed his moods at a moment’s notice. ‘But there’s
great cause of suspicion in this silence and this keeping out of sight, and
I’ll bear it in mind. Now we will go across to Owlett’s orchard,
and see what we can find there.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale, who heard this discussion from the garden-gate, over which he had
been leaning, was rather alarmed, and thought it a mistake of the villagers to
keep so completely out of the way. He himself, like the excisemen, had been
wondering for the last half-hour what could have become of them. Some labourers
were of necessity engaged in distant fields, but the master-workmen should have
been at home; though one and all, after just showing themselves at their shops,
had apparently gone off for the day. He went in to Lizzy, who sat at a back
window sewing, and said, ‘Lizzy, where are the men?’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy laughed. ‘Where they mostly are when they’re run so hard as
this.’ She cast her eyes to heaven. ‘Up there,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale looked up. ‘What—on the top of the church tower?’
he asked, seeing the direction of her glance.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I expect they will soon have to come down,’ said he gravely.
‘I have been listening to the officers, and they are going to search the
orchard over again, and then every nook in the church.’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy looked alarmed for the first time. ‘Will you go and tell our
folk?’ she said. ‘They ought to be let know.’ Seeing his
conscience struggling within him like a boiling pot, she added, ‘No,
never mind, I’ll go myself.’
</p>
<p>
She went out, descended the garden, and climbed over the churchyard wall at the
same time that the preventive-men were ascending the road to the orchard.
Stockdale could do no less than follow her. By the time that she reached the
tower entrance he was at her side, and they entered together.
</p>
<p>
Nether-Moynton church-tower was, as in many villages, without a turret, and the
only way to the top was by going up to the singers’ gallery, and thence
ascending by a ladder to a square trap-door in the floor of the bell-loft,
above which a permanent ladder was fixed, passing through the bells to a hole
in the roof. When Lizzy and Stockdale reached the gallery and looked up,
nothing but the trap-door and the five holes for the bell-ropes appeared. The
ladder was gone.
</p>
<p>
‘There’s no getting up,’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘O yes, there is,’ said she. ‘There’s an eye looking at
us at this moment through a knot-hole in that trap-door.’
</p>
<p>
And as she spoke the trap opened, and the dark line of the ladder was seen
descending against the white-washed wall. When it touched the bottom Lizzy
dragged it to its place, and said, ‘If you’ll go up, I’ll
follow.’
</p>
<p>
The young man ascended, and presently found himself among consecrated bells for
the first time in his life, nonconformity having been in the Stockdale blood
for some generations. He eyed them uneasily, and looked round for Lizzy. Owlett
stood here, holding the top of the ladder.
</p>
<p>
‘What, be you really one of us?’ said the miller.
</p>
<p>
‘It seems so,’ said Stockdale sadly.
</p>
<p>
‘He’s not,’ said Lizzy, who overheard. ‘He’s
neither for nor against us. He’ll do us no harm.’
</p>
<p>
She stepped up beside them, and then they went on to the next stage, which,
when they had clambered over the dusty bell-carriages, was of easy ascent,
leading towards the hole through which the pale sky appeared, and into the open
air. Owlett remained behind for a moment, to pull up the lower ladder.
</p>
<p>
‘Keep down your heads,’ said a voice, as soon as they set foot on
the flat.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale here beheld all the missing parishioners, lying on their stomachs on
the tower roof, except a few who, elevated on their hands and knees, were
peeping through the embrasures of the parapet. Stockdale did the same, and saw
the village lying like a map below him, over which moved the figures of the
excisemen, each foreshortened to a crablike object, the crown of his hat
forming a circular disc in the centre of him. Some of the men had turned their
heads when the young preacher’s figure arose among them.
</p>
<p>
‘What, Mr. Stockdale?’ said Matt Grey, in a tone of surprise.
</p>
<p>
‘I’d as lief that it hadn’t been,’ said Jim Clarke.
‘If the pa’son should see him a trespassing here in his tower,
’twould be none the better for we, seeing how ’a do hate
chapel-members. He’d never buy a tub of us again, and he’s as good
a customer as we have got this side o’ Warm’ll.’
</p>
<p>
‘Where is the pa’son?’ said Lizzy.
</p>
<p>
‘In his house, to be sure, that he mid see nothing of what’s going
on—where all good folks ought to be, and this young man likewise.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, he has brought some news,’ said Lizzy. ‘They are going
to search the orchet and church; can we do anything if they should find?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ said her cousin Owlett. ‘That’s what we’ve
been talking o’, and we have settled our line. Well, be dazed!’
</p>
<p>
The exclamation was caused by his perceiving that some of the searchers, having
got into the orchard, and begun stooping and creeping hither and thither, were
pausing in the middle, where a tree smaller than the rest was growing. They
drew closer, and bent lower than ever upon the ground.
</p>
<p>
‘O, my tubs!’ said Lizzy faintly, as she peered through the parapet
at them.
</p>
<p>
‘They have got ’em, ’a b’lieve,’ said Owlett.
</p>
<p>
The interest in the movements of the officers was so keen that not a single eye
was looking in any other direction; but at that moment a shout from the church
beneath them attracted the attention of the smugglers, as it did also of the
party in the orchard, who sprang to their feet and went towards the churchyard
wall. At the same time those of the Government men who had entered the church
unperceived by the smugglers cried aloud, ‘Here be some of ’em at
last.’
</p>
<p>
The smugglers remained in a blank silence, uncertain whether ‘some of
’em’ meant tubs or men; but again peeping cautiously over the edge
of the tower they learnt that tubs were the things descried; and soon these
fated articles were brought one by one into the middle of the churchyard from
their hiding-place under the gallery-stairs.
</p>
<p>
‘They are going to put ’em on Hinton’s vault till they find
the rest!’ said Lizzy hopelessly. The excisemen had, in fact, begun to
pile up the tubs on a large stone slab which was fixed there; and when all were
brought out from the tower, two or three of the men were left standing by them,
the rest of the party again proceeding to the orchard.
</p>
<p>
The interest of the smugglers in the next manoeuvres of their enemies became
painfully intense. Only about thirty tubs had been secreted in the lumber of
the tower, but seventy were hidden in the orchard, making up all that they had
brought ashore as yet, the remainder of the cargo having been tied to a sinker
and dropped overboard for another night’s operations. The excisemen,
having re-entered the orchard, acted as if they were positive that here lay
hidden the rest of the tubs, which they were determined to find before
nightfall. They spread themselves out round the field, and advancing on all
fours as before, went anew round every apple-tree in the enclosure. The young
tree in the middle again led them to pause, and at length the whole company
gathered there in a way which signified that a second chain of reasoning had
led to the same results as the first.
</p>
<p>
When they had examined the sod hereabouts for some minutes, one of the men
rose, ran to a disused porch of the church where tools were kept, and returned
with the sexton’s pickaxe and shovel, with which they set to work.
</p>
<p>
‘Are they really buried there?’ said the minister, for the grass
was so green and uninjured that it was difficult to believe it had been
disturbed. The smugglers were too interested to reply, and presently they saw,
to their chagrin, the officers stand several on each side of the tree; and,
stooping and applying their hands to the soil, they bodily lifted the tree and
the turf around it. The apple-tree now showed itself to be growing in a shallow
box, with handles for lifting at each of the four sides. Under the site of the
tree a square hole was revealed, and an exciseman went and looked down.
</p>
<p>
‘It is all up now,’ said Owlett quietly. ‘And now all of ye
get down before they notice we are here; and be ready for our next move. I had
better bide here till dark, or they may take me on suspicion, as ’tis on
my ground. I’ll be with ye as soon as daylight begins to pink in.’
</p>
<p>
‘And I?’ said Lizzy.
</p>
<p>
‘You please look to the linch-pins and screws; then go indoors and know
nothing at all. The chaps will do the rest.’
</p>
<p>
The ladder was replaced, and all but Owlett descended, the men passing off one
by one at the back of the church, and vanishing on their respective errands.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy walked boldly along the street, followed closely by the minister.
</p>
<p>
‘You are going indoors, Mrs. Newberry?’ he said.
</p>
<p>
She knew from the words ‘Mrs. Newberry’ that the division between
them had widened yet another degree.
</p>
<p>
‘I am not going home,’ she said. ‘I have a little thing to do
before I go in. Martha Sarah will get your tea.’
</p>
<p>
‘O, I don’t mean on that account,’ said Stockdale.
‘What <i>can</i> you have to do further in this unhallowed affair?’
</p>
<p>
‘Only a little,’ she said.
</p>
<p>
‘What is that? I’ll go with you.’
</p>
<p>
‘No, I shall go by myself. Will you please go indoors? I shall be there
in less than an hour.’
</p>
<p>
‘You are not going to run any danger, Lizzy?’ said the young man,
his tenderness reasserting itself.
</p>
<p>
‘None whatever—worth mentioning,’ answered she, and went down
towards the Cross.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale entered the garden gate, and stood behind it looking on. The
excisemen were still busy in the orchard, and at last he was tempted to enter,
and watch their proceedings. When he came closer he found that the secret
cellar, of whose existence he had been totally unaware, was formed by timbers
placed across from side to side about a foot under the ground, and grassed
over.
</p>
<p>
The excisemen looked up at Stockdale’s fair and downy countenance, and
evidently thinking him above suspicion, went on with their work again. As soon
as all the tubs were taken out, they began tearing up the turf; pulling out the
timbers, and breaking in the sides, till the cellar was wholly dismantled and
shapeless, the apple-tree lying with its roots high to the air. But the hole
which had in its time held so much contraband merchandize was never completely
filled up, either then or afterwards, a depression in the greensward marking
the spot to this day.
</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VII—THE WALK TO WARM’ELL CROSS AND AFTERWARDS</h3>
<p>
As the goods had all to be carried to Budmouth that night, the
excisemen’s next object was to find horses and carts for the journey, and
they went about the village for that purpose. Latimer strode hither and thither
with a lump of chalk in his hand, marking broad-arrows so vigorously on every
vehicle and set of harness that he came across, that it seemed as if he would
chalk broad-arrows on the very hedges and roads. The owner of every conveyance
so marked was bound to give it up for Government purposes. Stockdale, who had
had enough of the scene, turned indoors thoughtful and depressed. Lizzy was
already there, having come in at the back, though she had not yet taken off her
bonnet. She looked tired, and her mood was not much brighter than his own. They
had but little to say to each other; and the minister went away and attempted
to read; but at this he could not succeed, and he shook the little bell for
tea.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy herself brought in the tray, the girl having run off into the village
during the afternoon, too full of excitement at the proceedings to remember her
state of life. However, almost before the sad lovers had said anything to each
other, Martha came in in a steaming state.
</p>
<p>
‘O, there’s such a stoor, Mrs. Newberry and Mr. Stockdale! The
king’s excisemen can’t get the carts ready nohow at all! They
pulled Thomas Ballam’s, and William Rogers’s, and Stephen
Sprake’s carts into the road, and off came the wheels, and down fell the
carts; and they found there was no linch-pins in the arms; and then they tried
Samuel Shane’s waggon, and found that the screws were gone from he, and
at last they looked at the dairyman’s cart, and he’s got none
neither! They have gone now to the blacksmith’s to get some made, but
he’s nowhere to be found!’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale looked at Lizzy, who blushed very slightly, and went out of the room,
followed by Martha Sarah. But before they had got through the passage there was
a rap at the front door, and Stockdale recognized Latimer’s voice
addressing Mrs. Newberry, who had turned back.
</p>
<p>
‘For God’s sake, Mrs. Newberry, have you seen Hardman the
blacksmith up this way? If we could get hold of him, we’d e’en
a’most drag him by the hair of his head to his anvil, where he ought to
be.’
</p>
<p>
‘He’s an idle man, Mr. Latimer,’ said Lizzy archly.
‘What do you want him for?’
</p>
<p>
‘Why, there isn’t a horse in the place that has got more than three
shoes on, and some have only two. The waggon-wheels be without strakes, and
there’s no linch-pins to the carts. What with that, and the bother about
every set of harness being out of order, we shan’t be off before
nightfall—upon my soul we shan’t. ’Tis a rough lot, Mrs.
Newberry, that you’ve got about you here; but they’ll play at this
game once too often, mark my words they will! There’s not a man in the
parish that don’t deserve to be whipped.’
</p>
<p>
It happened that Hardman was at that moment a little further up the lane,
smoking his pipe behind a holly-bush. When Latimer had done speaking he went on
in this direction, and Hardman, hearing the exciseman’s steps, found
curiosity too strong for prudence. He peeped out from the bush at the very
moment that Latimer’s glance was on it. There was nothing left for him to
do but to come forward with unconcern.
</p>
<p>
‘I’ve been looking for you for the last hour!’ said Latimer
with a glare in his eye.
</p>
<p>
‘Sorry to hear that,’ said Hardman. ‘I’ve been out for
a stroll, to look for more hid tubs, to deliver ’em up to
Gover’ment.’
</p>
<p>
‘O yes, Hardman, we know it,’ said Latimer, with withering sarcasm.
‘We know that you’ll deliver ’em up to Gover’ment. We
know that all the parish is helping us, and have been all day! Now you please
walk along with me down to your shop, and kindly let me hire ye in the
king’s name.’
</p>
<p>
They went down the lane together; and presently there resounded from the smithy
the ring of a hammer not very briskly swung. However, the carts and horses were
got into some sort of travelling condition, but it was not until after the
clock had struck six, when the muddy roads were glistening under the horizontal
light of the fading day. The smuggled tubs were soon packed into the vehicles,
and Latimer, with three of his assistants, drove slowly out of the village in
the direction of the port of Budmouth, some considerable number of miles
distant, the other excisemen being left to watch for the remainder of the
cargo, which they knew to have been sunk somewhere between Ringsworth and
Lulstead Cove, and to unearth Owlett, the only person clearly implicated by the
discovery of the cave.
</p>
<p>
Women and children stood at the doors as the carts, each chalked with the
Government pitchfork, passed in the increasing twilight; and as they stood they
looked at the confiscated property with a melancholy expression that told only
too plainly the relation which they bore to the trade.
</p>
<p>
‘Well, Lizzy,’ said Stockdale, when the crackle of the wheels had
nearly died away. ‘This is a fit finish to your adventure. I am truly
thankful that you have got off without suspicion, and the loss only of the
liquor. Will you sit down and let me talk to you?’
</p>
<p>
‘By and by,’ she said. ‘But I must go out now.’
</p>
<p>
‘Not to that horrid shore again?’ he said blankly.
</p>
<p>
‘No, not there. I am only going to see the end of this day’s
business.’
</p>
<p>
He did not answer to this, and she moved towards the door slowly, as if waiting
for him to say something more.
</p>
<p>
‘You don’t offer to come with me,’ she added at last.
‘I suppose that’s because you hate me after all this?’
</p>
<p>
‘Can you say it, Lizzy, when you know I only want to save you from such
practices? Come with you of course I will, if it is only to take care of you.
But why will you go out again?’
</p>
<p>
‘Because I cannot rest indoors. Something is happening, and I must know
what. Now, come!’ And they went into the dusk together.
</p>
<p>
When they reached the turnpike-road she turned to the right, and he soon
perceived that they were following the direction of the excisemen and their
load. He had given her his arm, and every now and then she suddenly pulled it
back, to signify that he was to halt a moment and listen. They had walked
rather quickly along the first quarter of a mile, and on the second or third
time of standing still she said, ‘I hear them ahead—don’t
you?’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ he said; ‘I hear the wheels. But what of that?’
</p>
<p>
‘I only want to know if they get clear away from the
neighbourhood.’
</p>
<p>
‘Ah,’ said he, a light breaking upon him. ‘Something
desperate is to be attempted!—and now I remember there was not a man
about the village when we left.’
</p>
<p>
‘Hark!’ she murmured. The noise of the cartwheels had stopped, and
given place to another sort of sound.
</p>
<p>
‘’Tis a scuffle!’ said Stockdale. ‘There’ll be
murder! Lizzy, let go my arm; I am going on. On my conscience, I must not stay
here and do nothing!’
</p>
<p>
‘There’ll be no murder, and not even a broken head,’ she
said. ‘Our men are thirty to four of them: no harm will be done at
all.’
</p>
<p>
‘Then there <i>is</i> an attack!’ exclaimed Stockdale; ‘and
you knew it was to be. Why should you side with men who break the laws like
this?’
</p>
<p>
‘Why should you side with men who take from country traders what they
have honestly bought wi’ their own money in France?’ said she
firmly.
</p>
<p>
‘They are not honestly bought,’ said he.
</p>
<p>
‘They are,’ she contradicted. ‘I and Owlett and the others
paid thirty shillings for every one of the tubs before they were put on board
at Cherbourg, and if a king who is nothing to us sends his people to steal our
property, we have a right to steal it back again.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale did not stop to argue the matter, but went quickly in the direction
of the noise, Lizzy keeping at his side. ‘Don’t you interfere, will
you, dear Richard?’ she said anxiously, as they drew near.
‘Don’t let us go any closer: ’tis at Warm’ell Cross
where they are seizing ’em. You can do no good, and you may meet with a
hard blow!’
</p>
<p>
‘Let us see first what is going on,’ he said. But before they had
got much further the noise of the cartwheels began again; and Stockdale soon
found that they were coming towards him. In another minute the three carts came
up, and Stockdale and Lizzy stood in the ditch to let them pass.
</p>
<p>
Instead of being conducted by four men, as had happened when they went out of
the village, the horses and carts were now accompanied by a body of from twenty
to thirty, all of whom, as Stockdale perceived to his astonishment, had
blackened faces. Among them walked six or eight huge female figures, whom, from
their wide strides, Stockdale guessed to be men in disguise. As soon as the
party discerned Lizzy and her companion four or five fell back, and when the
carts had passed, came close to the pair.
</p>
<p>
‘There is no walking up this way for the present,’ said one of the
gaunt women, who wore curls a foot long, dangling down the sides of her face,
in the fashion of the time. Stockdale recognized this lady’s voice as
Owlett’s.
</p>
<p>
‘Why not?’ said Stockdale. ‘This is the public
highway.’
</p>
<p>
‘Now look here, youngster,’ said Owlett. ‘O, ’tis the
Methodist parson!—what, and Mrs. Newberry! Well, you’d better not
go up that way, Lizzy. They’ve all run off, and folks have got their own
again.’
</p>
<p>
The miller then hastened on and joined his comrades. Stockdale and Lizzy also
turned back. ‘I wish all this hadn’t been forced upon us,’
she said regretfully. ‘But if those excisemen had got off with the tubs,
half the people in the parish would have been in want for the next month or
two.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale was not paying much attention to her words, and he said, ‘I
don’t think I can go back like this. Those four poor excisemen may be
murdered for all I know.’
</p>
<p>
‘Murdered!’ said Lizzy impatiently. ‘We don’t do murder
here.’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, I shall go as far as Warm’ell Cross to see,’ said
Stockdale decisively; and, without wishing her safe home or anything else, the
minister turned back. Lizzy stood looking at him till his form was absorbed in
the shades; and then, with sadness, she went in the direction of
Nether-Moynton.
</p>
<p>
The road was lonely, and after nightfall at this time of the year there was
often not a passer for hours. Stockdale pursued his way without hearing a sound
beyond that of his own footsteps; and in due time he passed beneath the trees
of the plantation which surrounded the Warm’ell Cross-road. Before he had
reached the point of intersection he heard voices from the thicket.
</p>
<p>
‘Hoi-hoi-hoi! Help, help!’
</p>
<p>
The voices were not at all feeble or despairing, but they were unmistakably
anxious. Stockdale had no weapon, and before plunging into the pitchy darkness
of the plantation he pulled a stake from the hedge, to use in case of need.
When he got among the trees he shouted—‘What’s the
matter—where are you?’
</p>
<p>
‘Here,’ answered the voices; and, pushing through the brambles in
that direction, he came near the objects of his search.
</p>
<p>
‘Why don’t you come forward?’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘We be tied to the trees!’
</p>
<p>
‘Who are you?’
</p>
<p>
‘Poor Will Latimer the exciseman!’ said one plaintively.
‘Just come and cut these cords, there’s a good man. We were afraid
nobody would pass by to-night.’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale soon loosened them, upon which they stretched their limbs and stood
at their ease.
</p>
<p>
‘The rascals!’ said Latimer, getting now into a rage, though he had
seemed quite meek when Stockdale first came up. ‘’Tis the same set
of fellows. I know they were Moynton chaps to a man.’
</p>
<p>
‘But we can’t swear to ’em,’ said another. ‘Not
one of ’em spoke.’
</p>
<p>
‘What are you going to do?’ said Stockdale.
</p>
<p>
‘I’d fain go back to Moynton, and have at ’em again!’
said Latimer.
</p>
<p>
‘So would we!’ said his comrades.
</p>
<p>
‘Fight till we die!’ said Latimer.
</p>
<p>
‘We will, we will!’ said his men.
</p>
<p>
‘But,’ said Latimer, more frigidly, as they came out of the
plantation, ‘we don’t <i>know</i> that these chaps with black faces
were Moynton men? And proof is a hard thing.’
</p>
<p>
‘So it is,’ said the rest.
</p>
<p>
‘And therefore we won’t do nothing at all,’ said Latimer,
with complete dispassionateness. ‘For my part, I’d sooner be them
than we. The clitches of my arms are burning like fire from the cords those two
strapping women tied round ’em. My opinion is, now I have had time to
think o’t, that you may serve your Gover’ment at too high a price.
For these two nights and days I have not had an hour’s rest; and, please
God, here’s for home-along.’
</p>
<p>
The other officers agreed heartily to this course; and, thanking Stockdale for
his timely assistance, they parted from him at the Cross, taking themselves the
western road, and Stockdale going back to Nether-Moynton.
</p>
<p>
During that walk the minister was lost in reverie of the most painful kind. As
soon as he got into the house, and before entering his own rooms, he advanced
to the door of the little back parlour in which Lizzy usually sat with her
mother. He found her there alone. Stockdale went forward, and, like a man in a
dream, looked down upon the table that stood between him and the young woman,
who had her bonnet and cloak still on. As he did not speak, she looked up from
her chair at him, with misgiving in her eye.
</p>
<p>
‘Where are they gone?’ he then said listlessly.
</p>
<p>
‘Who?—I don’t know. I have seen nothing of them since. I came
straight in here.’
</p>
<p>
‘If your men can manage to get off with those tubs, it will be a great
profit to you, I suppose?’
</p>
<p>
‘A share will be mine, a share my cousin Owlett’s, a share to each
of the two farmers, and a share divided amongst the men who helped us.’
</p>
<p>
‘And you still think,’ he went on slowly, ‘that you will not
give this business up?’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy rose, and put her hand upon his shoulder. ‘Don’t ask
that,’ she whispered. ‘You don’t know what you are asking. I
must tell you, though I meant not to do it. What I make by that trade is all I
have to keep my mother and myself with.’
</p>
<p>
He was astonished. ‘I did not dream of such a thing,’ he said.
‘I would rather have swept the streets, had I been you. What is money
compared with a clear conscience?’
</p>
<p>
‘My conscience is clear. I know my mother, but the king I have never
seen. His dues are nothing to me. But it is a great deal to me that my mother
and I should live.’
</p>
<p>
‘Marry me, and promise to give it up. I will keep your mother.’
</p>
<p>
‘It is good of you,’ she said, trembling a little. ‘Let me
think of it by myself. I would rather not answer now.’
</p>
<p>
She reserved her answer till the next day, and came into his room with a solemn
face. ‘I cannot do what you wished!’ she said passionately.
‘It is too much to ask. My whole life ha’ been passed in this
way.’ Her words and manner showed that before entering she had been
struggling with herself in private, and that the contention had been strong.
</p>
<p>
Stockdale turned pale, but he spoke quietly. ‘Then, Lizzy, we must part.
I cannot go against my principles in this matter, and I cannot make my
profession a mockery. You know how I love you, and what I would do for you; but
this one thing I cannot do.’
</p>
<p>
‘But why should you belong to that profession?’ she burst out.
‘I have got this large house; why can’t you marry me, and live here
with us, and not be a Methodist preacher any more? I assure you, Richard, it is
no harm, and I wish you could only see it as I do! We only carry it on in
winter: in summer it is never done at all. It stirs up one’s dull life at
this time o’ the year, and gives excitement, which I have got so used to
now that I should hardly know how to do ‘ithout it. At nights, when the
wind blows, instead of being dull and stupid, and not noticing whether it do
blow or not, your mind is afield, even if you are not afield yourself; and you
are wondering how the chaps are getting on; and you walk up and down the room,
and look out o’ window, and then you go out yourself, and know your way
about as well by night as by day, and have hairbreadth escapes from old Latimer
and his fellows, who are too stupid ever to really frighten us, and only make
us a bit nimble.’
</p>
<p>
‘He frightened you a little last night, anyhow: and I would advise you to
drop it before it is worse.’
</p>
<p>
She shook her head. ‘No, I must go on as I have begun. I was born to it.
It is in my blood, and I can’t be cured. O, Richard, you cannot think
what a hard thing you have asked, and how sharp you try me when you put me
between this and my love for ‘ee!’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale was leaning with his elbow on the mantelpiece, his hands over his
eyes. ‘We ought never to have met, Lizzy,’ he said. ‘It was
an ill day for us! I little thought there was anything so hopeless and
impossible in our engagement as this. Well, it is too late now to regret
consequences in this way. I have had the happiness of seeing you and knowing
you at least.’
</p>
<p>
‘You dissent from Church, and I dissent from State,’ she said.
‘And I don’t see why we are not well matched.’
</p>
<p>
He smiled sadly, while Lizzy remained looking down, her eyes beginning to
overflow.
</p>
<p>
That was an unhappy evening for both of them, and the days that followed were
unhappy days. Both she and he went mechanically about their employments, and
his depression was marked in the village by more than one of his denomination
with whom he came in contact. But Lizzy, who passed her days indoors, was
unsuspected of being the cause: for it was generally understood that a quiet
engagement to marry existed between her and her cousin Owlett, and had existed
for some time.
</p>
<p>
Thus uncertainly the week passed on; till one morning Stockdale said to her:
‘I have had a letter, Lizzy. I must call you that till I am gone.’
</p>
<p>
‘Gone?’ said she blankly.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I am going from this place. I felt it would
be better for us both that I should not stay after what has happened. In fact,
I couldn’t stay here, and look on you from day to day, without becoming
weak and faltering in my course. I have just heard of an arrangement by which
the other minister can arrive here in about a week; and let me go
elsewhere.’
</p>
<p>
That he had all this time continued so firmly fixed in his resolution came upon
her as a grievous surprise. ‘You never loved me!’ she said
bitterly.
</p>
<p>
‘I might say the same,’ he returned; ‘but I will not. Grant
me one favour. Come and hear my last sermon on the day before I go.’
</p>
<p>
Lizzy, who was a church-goer on Sunday mornings, frequently attended
Stockdale’s chapel in the evening with the rest of the double-minded; and
she promised.
</p>
<p>
It became known that Stockdale was going to leave, and a good many people
outside his own sect were sorry to hear it. The intervening days flew rapidly
away, and on the evening of the Sunday which preceded the morning of his
departure Lizzy sat in the chapel to hear him for the last time. The little
building was full to overflowing, and he took up the subject which all had
expected, that of the contraband trade so extensively practised among them. His
hearers, in laying his words to their own hearts, did not perceive that they
were most particularly directed against Lizzy, till the sermon waxed warm, and
Stockdale nearly broke down with emotion. In truth his own earnestness, and her
sad eyes looking up at him, were too much for the young man’s equanimity.
He hardly knew how he ended. He saw Lizzy, as through a mist, turn and go away
with the rest of the congregation; and shortly afterwards followed her home.
</p>
<p>
She invited him to supper, and they sat down alone, her mother having, as was
usual with her on Sunday nights, gone to bed early.
</p>
<p>
‘We will part friends, won’t we?’ said Lizzy, with forced
gaiety, and never alluding to the sermon: a reticence which rather disappointed
him.
</p>
<p>
‘We will,’ he said, with a forced smile on his part; and they sat
down.
</p>
<p>
It was the first meal that they had ever shared together in their lives, and
probably the last that they would so share. When it was over, and the
indifferent conversation could no longer be continued, he arose and took her
hand. ‘Lizzy,’ he said, ‘do you say we must part—do
you?’
</p>
<p>
‘You do,’ she said solemnly. ‘I can say no more.’
</p>
<p>
‘Nor I,’ said he. ‘If that is your answer, good-bye!’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale bent over her and kissed her, and she involuntarily returned his
kiss. ‘I shall go early,’ he said hurriedly. ‘I shall not see
you again.’
</p>
<p>
And he did leave early. He fancied, when stepping forth into the grey morning
light, to mount the van which was to carry him away, that he saw a face between
the parted curtains of Lizzy’s window, but the light was faint, and the
panes glistened with wet; so he could not be sure. Stockdale mounted the
vehicle, and was gone; and on the following Sunday the new minister preached in
the chapel of the Moynton Wesleyans.
</p>
<p class="p2">
One day, two years after the parting, Stockdale, now settled in a midland town,
came into Nether-Moynton by carrier in the original way. Jogging along in the
van that afternoon he had put questions to the driver, and the answers that he
received interested the minister deeply. The result of them was that he went
without the least hesitation to the door of his former lodging. It was about
six o’clock in the evening, and the same time of year as when he had
left; now, too, the ground was damp and glistening, the west was bright, and
Lizzy’s snowdrops were raising their heads in the border under the wall.
</p>
<p>
Lizzy must have caught sight of him from the window, for by the time that he
reached the door she was there holding it open: and then, as if she had not
sufficiently considered her act of coming out, she drew herself back, saying
with some constraint, ‘Mr. Stockdale!’
</p>
<p>
‘You knew it was,’ said Stockdale, taking her hand. ‘I wrote
to say I should call.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes, but you did not say when,’ she answered.
</p>
<p>
‘I did not. I was not quite sure when my business would lead me to these
parts.’
</p>
<p>
‘You only came because business brought you near?’
</p>
<p>
‘Well, that is the fact; but I have often thought I should like to come
on purpose to see you . . . But what’s all this that has happened? I told
you how it would be, Lizzy, and you would not listen to me.’
</p>
<p>
‘I would not,’ she said sadly. ‘But I had been brought up to
that life; and it was second nature to me. However, it is all over now. The
officers have blood-money for taking a man dead or alive, and the trade is
going to nothing. We were hunted down like rats.’
</p>
<p>
‘Owlett is quite gone, I hear.’
</p>
<p>
‘Yes. He is in America. We had a dreadful struggle that last time, when
they tried to take him. It is a perfect miracle that he lived through it; and
it is a wonder that I was not killed. I was shot in the hand. It was not by
aim; the shot was really meant for my cousin; but I was behind, looking on as
usual, and the bullet came to me. It bled terribly, but I got home without
fainting; and it healed after a time. You know how he suffered?’
</p>
<p>
‘No,’ said Stockdale. ‘I only heard that he just escaped with
his life.’
</p>
<p>
‘He was shot in the back; but a rib turned the ball. He was badly hurt.
We would not let him be took. The men carried him all night across the meads to
Kingsbere, and hid him in a barn, dressing his wound as well as they could,
till he was so far recovered as to be able to get about. He had gied up his
mill for some time; and at last he got to Bristol, and took a passage to
America, and he’s settled in Wisconsin.’
</p>
<p>
‘What do you think of smuggling now?’ said the minister gravely.
</p>
<p>
‘I own that we were wrong,’ said she. ‘But I have suffered
for it. I am very poor now, and my mother has been dead these twelve months . .
. But won’t you come in, Mr. Stockdale?’
</p>
<p>
Stockdale went in; and it is to be supposed that they came to an understanding;
for a fortnight later there was a sale of Lizzy’s furniture, and after
that a wedding at a chapel in a neighbouring town.
</p>
<p>
He took her away from her old haunts to the home that he had made for himself
in his native county, where she studied her duties as a minister’s wife
with praiseworthy assiduity. It is said that in after years she wrote an
excellent tract called <i>Render unto Caesar; or, The Repentant Villagers</i>,
in which her own experience was anonymously used as the introductory story.
Stockdale got it printed, after making some corrections, and putting in a few
powerful sentences of his own; and many hundreds of copies were distributed by
the couple in the course of their married life.
</p>
<p class="p2">
<i>April</i> 1879.
</p>
</div>